Some words---*bank, government, weather, gun*---give off a decidedly
ambivalent vibe. It all depends. Others are more clearly
negative---*pollution, debt, cult*---or positive---*love, warmth,
faith*. For me, the word community is in the "positive" category.

I would rather not get into the definition game; books have been written
about it. Maybe we can get away with saying, "you know community when
you see it." In any event, for most people, most of the time, community
conjures thoughts and feelings that are good, supportive, comfortable.
Those who find it suffocating to live in places where the person next
door knows too much about them will generally not complain about
community; instead, their complaint will center on small towns, on nosy
neighbors, or on not having enough to do. In fact, we often hear and
read laments about the decline of community feeling in the contemporary
world. Most of us think it's good to live in a place that has a
community feel about it, whether that place is an urban neighborhood, a
rural church parish, or a village.

*Rootstalk* is a publication of Grinnell College's Center for Prairie
Studies
(https://www.grinnell.edu/academics/centers-programs/prairie-studies),
whose three guiding principles---as it says on our letterhead---are
*community, sustainability, and place*. By definition then, we at
*Rootstalk* are interested in community---its meaning, its shape, and
our ability to keep it healthy. What experiences create a feeling of
community? What goals can bring a community together? What strains can
divide a community? What role do memory and tradition play in
maintaining a community?

This issue of *Rootstalk* offers several pieces of content that address
such questions. The short essays by Bridget Brandt, Sam Cox, Randall
Hotchkin, and Allan and Shirley Moyer in fact came out of a writing
workshop, centered on defining community, which we held last spring as
part of a class at Grinnell College co-taught by *Rootstalk's* editor,
Mark Baechtel, and myself. The students in our class first took their
own writing workshop, facilitated by noted northeast Iowa writer and
publisher, Robert Wolf (whose new book, *Building the Agricultural City:
A Handbook for Rural Renewal*
(http://www.robertwolfthewriter.com/books/building-the-agricultural-city),
is reviewed in this issue by Fred Kirschenmann). Bob, who has led
writing workshops around the country, had each student share a personal
story with the class. These oral stories became the basis for writing,
as Bob coached each student in finding their voice and creating an
engaging narrative structure. Next, we invited residents from the town
of Grinnell (https://www.grinnelliowa.gov, where Grinnell College is
located) to participate in the class for several sessions. Each
community member was paired with a student, whose task it was to help
them in the way Bob had helped the students. The stories that came out
of these sessions provide glimpses of the community feeling in Grinnell.
We decided to include in this set a photo essay by one of the students
in the class, Katie Hess, as it deals with an after-school arts program
in Grinnell.

There are other content-pieces in this issue which deal with community.
An essay from Mary Kay Shanley (http://www.marykayshanley.com) explores
the evolution of newspaper obituaries as an expression of community
life. Joshua Lockyer
(https://www.atu.edu/profiles.php?name=jlockyer&menu=behaviorsci) tells
us about the Dancing Rabbit Ecovillage (https://www.dancingrabbit.org)
in northeast Missouri---an intentionally-formed community whose
residents are transforming a piece of former farmland into a space where
they can collectively realize a new vision of society, in the process
finding ways to dramatically shrink their collective carbon footprint.
An autobiographical essay from Dartanyan Brown
(https://www.dartanyan.com/About\_Me.html) begins in the Mahaska County,
Iowa, coal mining town of Buxton
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buxton\_Historic\_Townsite), a racially
integrated community where his grandmother was born. Her experience
there shaped Dartanyan's sense of community throughout his life.

Not all of the content in the fall issue deals with community, but---as
usual---all of it deals with life in the prairie region, which we like
to think of as a wider community of readers. We hope you enjoy
everything in the issue, and we hope that what you see here provokes you
to frame your own thoughts about what it means to live in concert with
other humans. Let us hear from you. For guidelines on sending us your
work, go to: https://rootstalk.grinnell.edu/how\_to\_submit.
