---
title: "Peaches, Meet Corn"
subtitle:
date: 2017-12-03T17:25:51-08:00
draft: false
author: "Mariah Manoylov"
articletype: "Essay"
headerimage: "peaches-meet-corn.jpg"
headshot: "mariah-manoylov.jpg"
authorbio: "[*Mariah Manoylov*](http://mariahmanoylov.com) studies Ecology and English at the [University of Georgia](http://www.uga.edu). While this is her first publication in *Rootstalk*, she’s had short stories published in other literary magazines such as [*Stillpoint*](https://thestillpointjournal.com), and had plays produced in the Classic City Fringe Festival in Athens, GA. Mariah communicates environmental themes in her creative writing, making art that’s not only engaging but educational."
description: "In this essay, a Georgia-based writer shares her introduction to the prairie's wild beauty."
---

As a Georgia native, I thought the Midwest meant corn and cows and people
who said “baggy” as “bayggy.” It wasn’t until my first year in Iowa that
I realized how charming the sleepy little state could be.

At sixteen years old, a junior in high school, I set out for [Iowa
Lakeside Laboratory](https://iowalakesidelab.org) in Milford, Iowa for a
conservation biology class. The field station was established in 1909,
and the stone cabin classrooms bore evidence of a century of weathering.
They felt lived in, like stepping into a pair of my father’s work boots.
How a structure could survive a hundred years of tornadoes, hail, and
Midwestern lighting baffled me, but there I was, standing in one.

“Alright, time to go,” my professor said. After a brief lecture on
wetland ecology and conservation, we put on our waders and were off to
count some wetland vertebrates. Over four weeks of counting, we’d see
how the vertebrate data compared to previous records for that specific
time period, indicating how its wetland ecology changed over the years.
In my juvenal ignorance, though, I didn’t really comprehend the
importance of the work we were doing. I was just excited to stomp around
in wetland for the first time.

My four classmates and I loaded into one of those boxy white vans.
Starting up the engine, my professor tossed, “You ready, Georgia?” over
his shoulder: a clever nickname my colleagues came up for me.

“As I’ll ever be,” I replied. We set off.

The miles of corn reminded me of the beach. Water never interested me,
but you better believe I was that kid making civilizations out of sand.
I, the sand castle wizard, built kingdoms from grains, subjects out of
sea shells and stray twigs. The result would be something like the
topography of Georgia: hilly, mottled, and charmingly uneven, but with a
firm swipe and fierce “Mwahaha” I made the land flat again. This was how
I saw Iowa: a land swiped of all its features, comforted by the horizon.
I felt like I could unfurl my arms in the transparency of the open land
and touch nothing on either side.

We exited the van to a fanfare of frog songs. A sulphur-smelling wetland
shimmered past a fence of reeds. My classmates and I grabbed our field
notebooks, a bucket, a seine net, and the data sheets and took our
initial steps into the murky water.

In addition to being the kid who exclusively played in the sand, I had
also enjoyed rolling around in mud. Taking those first few steps awoke
the sleeping child in me. I kid you not, I actually giggled as I walked
further in, the water rising past my ankles and knees, sloshing water
with every step.

{{% pullquote %}}
There I was, a drunken see-saw trying to stop the wetland from nibbling my feet.
{{% /pullquote %}}

But the giddiness disappeared when I took one step and sank to my
crotch. Water spilled over the top of my waders and soaked my torso and
legs. I stepped back on my free leg to pull myself out, which just got
my opposite foot stuck. There I was, a drunken see-saw trying to stop
the wetland from nibbling my feet. My native Iowan classmates might as
well have been those lizards who can walk on water.

The class had already checked the cages, documenting frogs, salamanders,
or any other critter while I was ten feet back slinging mud everywhere.
By the time I had made about three feet of progress, the others had
finished up and started back towards the van. Panic jolted my stomach.
It was the first day of class and I didn’t want to keep everyone waiting
because I was mud-wrestling myself out of a wetland. I silenced my
motions, breathed in, then breathed out. I knew what I had to do.

I closed my eyes, dipped under the murky brown water, and pressed my
palms against the bottom of the wetland. Cold mud oozed between my
fingers. With a firm push and mental cursing, the wetland released my
boot. I doggy-paddled out, avoiding the muddy bottom entirely. My waders
sloshed with water as I ran out of there. I probably looked like the
mud-equivalent to Carrie at prom, but I made it back to the van right as
the last student sat down.

My professor hid a smile, baseball cap covering his eyes. “Mud mask,
Georgia?”

I quieted my panting. “And a workout.”

My second intimate encounter with the Iowa terrain happened three years
later, when I returned to the same field station, as the summer Writer
in Residence. I was a rising junior in college, filled with frantic
creative energy.

I had been writing late into the night in a building near my cabin. The
front wall was almost completely made of glass so potential visitors
could see if the building was occupied or not. At midnight, I was the
only one there.

As I saved my Word documents and packed my bags, a flash of light
startled me. The intensity of the flash reminded me of paparazzi
snapping photos with those gaudy attachable lights. Then another flash.

*Is it fireworks?* I thought. It was close to the Fourth of July, but
who used bright white fireworks?

Turned out to be neither. Just a good ol’ fashioned Iowa lightning
storm.

My breath fogged the glass wall as I stared at the sky. The frequency of
the lightning increased till it looked like a child flailing a
flashlight underneath a slush colored blanket.

“Whoooaaaa.”

The same childlike giddiness bubbled into a smile on my face. But then
the first gunshot of thunder nearly floored me. Then the hail fell,
pounding against the ground as if a thousand terrible golfers thought my
building was their target. I had never experienced anything like it: the
torrents of hail, the spasming lights, and the boom after boom of
thunder. If the prairies were quiet by day, they certainly partied by
night.

Despite the frenzy, the chaotic weather outside emphasized the stillness
within the building, much like how passing a car crash makes me
appreciate the togetherness of my own car, my own body. I sat on the
cold tile floor, enjoying my steady breath as if it were a warm cup of
tea. I slept on the floor that night, lulled by the hail pinging against
the roof.

Some people brag about sleeping with numerous partners. I brag about
sleeping with a lightning storm, which is something I can’t say in
Georgia. As I live my life in the Peach State, I catch myself teleported
back at Lakeside Laboratory, remembering the land—honest, with nothing
to hide—and feel like I’m back in a second grade recess. While Georgian
stability is nice, it doesn’t compare to hungry wetlands and
cloud-paparazzi. I miss the gentle chaos, plan to return to the land of
corn someday. Hopefully with a full body wetsuit and ear plugs.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-iv-issue-2/hayworth-wetland.jpg" caption="Photo by Justin Hayworth" %}}