---
title: "Roadtrip"
subtitle:
date: 2020-01-05T00:58:11-08:00
draft: false
author: "Tracy Harris"
articletype: "Essay"
headerimage: "harris-roadtrip.jpg"
headshot: "tracy-harris.jpg"
authorbio: "Tracy Harris is a writer and art lover from St. Paul, Minnesota. Her essays have appeared in [*Midwestern Gothic*](http://midwestgothic.com), [*Tahoma Literary Review*](https://tahomaliteraryreview.com), *Mason’s Road*, and [*Lunch Ticket*](http://lunchticket.org), among others. She is a former board member of [*Water-Stone Review*]http://waterstonereview.com) and participant in [Cracked Walnut](http://www.crackedwalnut.com), a series of literary readings in the Twin Cities."
description: "What's an East Coast transplant to do when she doesn't feel she fits in the Midwest? Fill a car with friends and head for Davenport, Iowa."
---

“That’s a fucking beaver in the middle of the road!”

Sofia shrieked from inside the maroon SUV, then burst out laughing. The
rest of us turned to get a look before the traffic light turned green.

It was as if we’d found a living talisman for the weekend, focusing our
attention like a bullseye smack dab in the center of Rock Island,
Illinois. The beaver was unexpected and out of place, as incongruous as
the monumental painting that we’d driven 300 miles to see had seemed in
Davenport, Iowa, just over the river. And yet here we all were: me, my
friends, the painting, and now a three-foot long beaver, sitting on its
haunches amid the rundown wooden houses and boarded up storefronts in
the center of a town apparently more dismal even than Davenport, the
city across the Mississippi that we had already christened, “Where Hope
Goes to Die.”

We had come to Davenport to see Jackson Pollock’s [*Mural*](https://uima.uiowa.edu/collections/american-art-1900-1980/jackson-pollock/mural),
one of the most important paintings in the history of modern art. It
launched Pollock’s career in 1943, established Abstract Expressionism as
the major art movement of the 20th century, and solidified New York
City’s emergence as the center of the international art world. It was
commissioned specifically to fill, and according to some accounts even
trimmed to fit, the entryway of heiress and art patron Peggy
Guggenheim’s Upper East Side brownstone. It was a product of the city in
which it was created and a catalyst that helped create what that city
would become.

*Mural* belonged in New York. An east coast transplant myself, I
couldn’t help feeling a bit sorry for the painting; I felt surprised and
almost embarrassed that it had not found a worthier home. *Mural*
deserved a showcase on a major stage; instead it ended up in Iowa, just
across the river from a neighborhood whose greatest attraction appeared
to be a beaver in the middle of the road.

To give credit where it’s due, Davenport’s [Figge Art Museum](http://figgeartmuseum.org/Home.aspx) is lovely. When we were there, its
galleries were so empty that I managed to flout the rules and get a
photo of myself standing next to Pollock’s masterwork. I was not,
unfortunately, quick enough to find my phone and snap a picture of the
beaver, even though Danielle was driving slowly as she maneuvered her
enormous Ford Explorer through the Rock Island crossroads that hot
Saturday afternoon. We had crossed the river after our museum visit to
see what else there was to do in the Quad Cities, and like the listless
citizens of Rock Island who were slumping about the downtown
intersection, we had not found much. Just a beaver in the middle of the
road, hands to its mouth, snacking on something that none of us in the
SUV had any desire to contemplate.

“Did it just crawl up from the river?” Kristina asked rhetorically.

“I don’t think it’s a fucking pet,” Sofia replied.

\* \* \*

In addition to Rock Island and Davenport, the Quad Cities include
Moline, Illinois, and Bettendorf, Iowa. We didn’t visit all four, but I
feel confident saying that Davenport is queen of the Quads. Its
population is over 100,000. Its downtown features several buildings on
the National Register of Historic Places. Jazz musician Bix Beiderbecke
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bix\_Beiderbecke) was born in Davenport,
as were several professional athletes whose names are unfamiliar to me.
Davenport is headquarters for an upscale regional department store
chain; it is served by four interstate highways; and in 2015 it had 168
confirmed shootings, at least according to Wikipedia. For a city of
100,000 that seems like a lot, but of course that number refers to
shootings, not homicides.

No place is perfect. It would be churlish to run Davenport down or
suggest it doesn’t deserve to house a masterpiece of modern art. I
certainly don’t mean to suggest that people in the Midwest can’t
appreciate the avant-garde or that the painting is wasted out here in
the hinterlands, hundreds of miles from a major airport or population
center. Well, maybe I do mean that last thing, at least a little.
Because Davenport felt like nowhere, and this was a surprising
conclusion to draw, especially after visiting with this group of
friends. We generally found the charm wherever we went.

We had met a few years earlier as tour guide trainees at Minneapolis’s
Walker Art Center (https://walkerart.org). We were an unlikely clique,
ranging from 32 to 62 in age, our music preferences running from punk
metal to opera. All but me had grown up in Minnesota, but our
backgrounds ranged from Panama to Latvia to one-quarter Chinese. Each of
us was probably an odd duck in her own way. But during a year of
studying pop art and conceptualism and visual theory, we had clicked
like crazy. No one thought it strange when I suggested we travel 300
miles just to see a painting.

{{% pullquote %}}We were all checked in to our motel when Danielle and Kristina decided to go to a biker bar they’d seen down the road.{{% /pullquote %}}

We had traveled together before. The previous summer, for example, we
had taken a road trip through Pennsylvania. Between the Andy Warhol
Museum (https://www.warhol.org) in Pittsburgh and the Barnes Collection
(https://www.barnesfoundation.org) in Philadelphia, there were many
highlights, like the night we met Kiefer Sutherland (who was then
starring in the Fox TV series 24) at a bar in downtown Philly and
Kristina asked him to take a picture of us. Which he did, quite
graciously.

But my favorite was the night we’d spent in Hershey. We were all checked
in to our motel when Danielle and Kristina decided to go to a biker bar
they’d seen down the road. Danielle had grown up around motorcycles, and
biker bars were kind of her milieu; plus she and Kristina were still
flying high from all the M&M samples they’d scarfed down on the
chocolate factory tour.

It was midnight, Sofia and Nancy had already gone to bed, and I was in
pajamas: black crop pants printed with multi-colored teapots and a solid
black tank top. But I had never been to a biker bar. Kristina convinced
me I didn’t need to change, and she was right, although I did take 30
seconds to put on a bra. At 52, I was the second oldest in our group and
felt some obligation to keep things classy.

The band was loud, and the bar was outstanding. I did my first-ever
Jello shots (green). I admired the bountiful tattoos gracing the arms,
chests and necks of the bar’s raucous patrons. I noted with pleasure
that even in my teapot pajamas I was one of the best dressed women in
the room. The only real contender was a tall, thin woman in a bejeweled,
flesh-tone unitard who was swaying to the music at one side of the dance
floor, a sinuous, writhing cylinder of bleach blond hair, beige skin,
beige spandex, and, I suspect, imitation gold.

At some point a skinny old guy staggered up to the open area where the
band was playing, fumbled the microphone from the lead singer and began
garbling a tribute to his fiancée. Turns out we had crashed an
engagement party. The bride-to-be clambered past a few tables and
stumbled up to stand next to her intended.

She was no ingénue, but then again neither was he. They appeared
somewhere in age between 40 and 70, and they looked a lot alike: blotchy
and pale, dressed in metal band t-shirts and torn jeans, squinting and
unsteady under the harsh stage lights. They both had shoulder length
hair of indeterminate greyish color. I couldn’t keep myself from
contemplating how much conditioner it would take and how many combs
would snap in two if either one decided to detangle before the wedding.
They wobbled together as he sang, his voice raspy and his words
unintelligible. They were beyond drunk, they were grinning a mile wide,
and they were god’s-truth adorable. I don’t think they had a full set of
teeth between the two of them.

All of which is to say that when I travel with this group of friends, we
do not seek out high-end experiences. We did not go to Davenport
expecting pâté and pinot noir. We really had no expectations, except for
the Jackson Pollock painting.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-iv-issue-2/fox-grain.jpg" caption="“Grain Bins and Gasahol,” by Robert Fox. Silver-gelatin print, 2016" %}}

\* \* \*

We arrived in Davenport on a Friday night and checked into a large,
clean motel just off the interstate. We did not look like any kind of
family or professional grouping, so maybe the nice young man at the
motel desk was just confused when we asked what there was to do
downtown. The museum, we knew, was closed at that hour, but there had to
be some restaurants open on a Friday evening. Maybe a movie theater, or
even a concert in a park?

“I don’t know. I never go there,” he said. That seemed odd. We weren’t
too surprised he hadn’t been to the art museum, but downtown was just
down the road. If he never went there, where did he go?

Still, downtown seemed like a better choice than the strip malls by the
highway. By the time we got there it was about 9 p.m., the sun was
setting, the night was warm. There were a couple of main streets lined
with brick and sandstone buildings, tall enough to feel like they were
closing in on us as the sky grew dark. A few bars had their doors open
and we could hear their music playing.

There did not seem to be anything else—no restaurants, no theaters—just
indifferently shaven young men, mostly blond and wearing loose-fitting
jeans, clustered in the bars’ open doorways, drinking, bobbing lightly
to the music, some juggling cigarettes in the same hand that grasped the
necks of their beer bottles. We passed a hot dog cart on a corner.
Emphatic guitar riffs and the thumping of overloud bass filled the air
with noise, suggesting a party atmosphere, but the streets were dark and
foreboding, despite the music. The bars seemed barely lit, and there
were not many lights on inside any of the buildings around us. We
approached one of the groups of young men. They were not rude when we
asked if there was anywhere open to eat.

“I think there’s a hot dog cart down the block,” one of them suggested
helpfully.

{{% pullquote %}}I wondered how much time it had taken the young women to get ready for their evening out, how much their feet hurt in their three-inch heels, how much hope they’d invested in what the nighttime streets of Davenport had to offer.{{% /pullquote %}}

There were young ladies on the scene, too. They seemed more interested
in walking from venue to venue, a Midwestern version of the Italian
*passeggiata,* perhaps. They had dressed up for the evening stroll, far
more so than the men. Fitted jeans with metallic embroidery on the back
pockets; thin, gauzy tops. Dangly earrings. Eyeshadow. Mascara. Long
hair that had been bleached, or moussed or styled with a curling iron,
or maybe some combination of all three. Most were pretty. All of them
wore high, spiky heels and tottered on the uneven pavement as they
walked in groups of three or four. They were probably in their early
20s, the same age as the more casually groomed men. This was it, their
prime, the glory days they would look back on.

I wondered how much time it had taken the young women to get ready for
their evening out, how much their feet hurt in their three-inch heels,
how much hope they’d invested in what the nighttime streets of Davenport
had to offer. I hoped the guys playing pool and air guitar were worth
it.

\* \* \*

An advantage of seeing *Mural* at the Figge was that we had it to
ourselves. The painting is enormous, approximately eight feet high and
twenty feet wide. Before *Mural*, Pollock had been painting far smaller
canvases, tending toward abstraction but still representing recognizable
images. *Mural* was his first large-scale all-over abstraction. Seeing
it was amazing. I stood close enough to see the uneven texture of the
paint that Pollock had brushed, spilled and thrown onto the canvas. I
stood back to take in the picture as a whole, to absorb its dense
succession of black and teal swirls, arrayed vertically across the wide
expanse of the horizontal picture plane and shadowed with splotches and
echoes of yellow, mauve, red and white. The effect is overwhelming:
nonstop motion, force and energy, somehow contained in two dimensions.
Some people see shapes or ghost-like figures in the lines and colors.
Pollock reportedly used the word “stampede” to describe the vision that
inspired the painting.

It’s not just the painting itself that is fantastic; it is the story of
its creation. In 1943 Pollock was an emerging artist, struggling to make
a name and a living for himself in New York, the city where new and
established artists had come to congregate, Europe*—*and particularly
Paris*—*having been overrun by the Nazis. Pollock was included that year
in the Spring Salon for Young Artists at an exciting new gallery called
“Art of This Century.” The gallery was owned and run by [Peggy Guggenheim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peggy\_Guggenheim), one of New York’s
most important collectors and a major promoter of contemporary art.

Shortly after the spring salon Guggenheim commissioned Pollock to create
a large work to fill the hallway of her new brownstone at 155 E. 61st
St. New York was usurping Paris as the art world’s epicenter, and
Guggenheim wanted to proclaim her support for new American art and
artists. The commission would augment her status as a taste-maker and
patron, and would give Pollock an opportunity to develop the potential
Guggenheim and her advisers saw in his smaller scale paintings.

Pollock signed the contract in July 1943. He received a monthly stipend
from Guggenheim, unheard of for artists at that time, and was given
complete freedom as to what to paint. But instead of painting directly
on the wall, Guggenheim wanted Pollock to create an enormous canvas,
something ostensibly portable. Pollock had to knock down the wall
between his studio and his brother’s next door in order to accommodate
the project. He hoped to have the painting done for a show at
Guggenheim’s gallery in November.

{{% pullquote %}}[I]n a frenetic and heroic burst of energy, Pollock painted the entire canvas in one night just before the deadline.{{% /pullquote %}}

November came and went. The enormous canvas was untouched. Guggenheim
grew anxious about whether the commission would be completed; Pollock
grew anxious and depressed about his ability to complete the commission,
and about the ramifications if he failed to satisfy one of New York’s
most important patrons. More weeks passed. Guggenheim wanted the
painting by New Year’s Day 1944 at the latest. Pollock was blocked.

Then, in a frenetic and heroic burst of energy, Pollock painted the
entire canvas in one night just before the deadline. As soon as it was
dry he brought the rolled up canvas to Guggenheim’s townhouse only to
find it was eight inches too long to fit in her hallway. [Marcel Duchamp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcel\_Duchamp), the émigré artist who a
generation earlier had revolutionized art with a notorious sculpture
made of an inverted urinal, and now one of Guggenheim’s closest friends
and advisers, solved the problem by cutting eight inches off one end of
the canvas. So the story goes. Duchamp’s trim job is unconfirmed.

The painting and Pollock became instant sensations. After seeing *Mural*
installed in Guggenheim’s apartment, New York art critic Clement
Greenberg proclaimed Pollock “the greatest painter this country has
produced.” Life Magazine would echo the sentiment in a cover story a few
years later. Pollock’s career soared; large-scale, all-over “action
painting,” as he called his very physical technique of pouring and
throwing paint onto enormous canvases, would revolutionize the
definition of art.

Decades later art conservators would question whether *Mural* could
really have been painted in one manic all-night session. Pollock’s
wildman persona made the story seem credible. Pollock had been born in
Wyoming and raised in Arizona and California. Remote, tempestuous,
unpredictable, Pollock embodied the myth of the American West in both
his personal life and in his art. It made sense that this untamed genius
would associate *Mural* with a stampede, and the story of the painting’s
creation lives on as one of the greatest legends in the annals of art
history.

*Mural’s* ultimate fate, however, turned on a bit of practical irony.
Although Peggy Guggenheim had commissioned a portable masterpiece, when
she decided in 1947 to close the Art of This Century gallery and move
she could not bring the painting with her: her new home in Venice did
not have enough room. Guggenheim wrote to an art world acquaintance,
Lester Longman, head of the University of Iowa School of Art and Art
History, and offered him the painting if he could pay for shipping. In
October of 1951, *Mural* arrived in Iowa.

\* \* \*

I am not from the Midwest. I grew up in Boston and always imagined I’d
end up in New York, or Washington, DC, or maybe San Francisco; and I did
live briefly in all of those places. But I married an academic, and
because I was waffling in my own career, we ended up following his job
opportunity to Minnesota. I came here voluntarily, went to law school,
raised two children. My choices, freely made. It’s not like I was put in
a box and shipped.

I’ve lived in the Midwest for more than 30 years, and I’ve pretty much
made my peace with it. The Twin Cities, unlike the Quads, are a major
metropolitan area, with plenty of theater, good restaurants, and, if not
the teeming diversity of New York, at least enough of a population to
offer a range of people and experiences. There is a lot to do here, and
it’s all more accessible than it would have been in the Northeast or the
West Coast. It certainly would have been harder to get accepted as a
volunteer tour guide in a bigger city with a more prestigious art
museum.

But the thing is, I feel out of place in the Midwest. My slight accent,
dark hair, and ethnic features mean people always ask if I’m “from here”
or, more specifically, if I’m from New York. The answer to both
questions is “no” and requires me to explain continually who I am and
why I live in Minnesota. An inordinate number of people seem to have
grandparents with farms; my grandparents, both sides, lived in run-down
inner-city apartment buildings. Maybe because of their farm backgrounds,
people here talk about gardening. A lot. It’s no one’s fault that I
glaze over when people talk about their yard projects. It’s no one’s
fault that I have nothing to add when people talk about their weekends
spent with local relatives or friends they’ve known since grade school.
It’s no one’s fault that so often I end up feeling like the oddball, or
resentful that I don’t have my own set of nearby relatives or childhood
friends, particularly on lonely weekends when everyone else seems busy.

{{% pullquote %}}Finding my place has always been a struggle, and I can’t blame it all on Minnesota or the Midwest.  But in my worst moments, I do.{{% /pullquote %}}

Truth is I’ve always been a hard fit. Not pretty or athletic enough in
high school (who is?). Not outdoorsy or vegetarian enough in graduate
school (Berkeley). Not young enough to be part of the crowd in law
school (here in Minnesota), not old enough or rich enough to blend in at
the first museum where I volunteered as a tour guide (the [Minneapolis
Institute of Art](https://new.artsmia.org/)), before I switched to the
contemporary art center where I met my gang of friends. Finding my place
has always been a struggle, and I can’t blame it all on Minnesota or the
Midwest.

But in my worst moments, I do. In my worst moments, I remember that when
I was interviewing for jobs after law school, all people did was look at
the Boston-Berkeley-DC trajectory on my resume and ask, “What are you
doing here?” Apparently if you’re not from Minnesota or the Dakotas,
Iowa or Wisconsin, people get suspicious. I don’t imagine anyone asked
Jackson Pollock why he moved to New York, but my prospective employers
were obsessed with my geographic dislocation. So, instead of talking
about my interest in immigration law, we’d talk about my husband’s
teaching position and why he and I chose to live in the cities rather
than the small town 30 miles south where his college is located. I
eventually received several job offers. It turned out I didn’t fit at my
law firm either. This was not particularly uncommon for a woman
litigator in the late 1980s, but it didn’t help that I started work
feeling like an outsider because I was not from the Midwest.

It’s not just my professional life. In my worst moments, all I see is
flatness and space. So much space. We envelop ourselves in it, like a
bubble wrap of single family houses and wide streets and Midwestern
politeness—they call it “Minnesota Nice” here—that protects us from
interacting too closely, too rudely, with strangers. But when you come
here as a stranger, that bubble wrap ends up feeling less like
comforting protection and more like social quarantine.

In my worst moments, I miss the energy of a bigger city, and I ache for
the reassuring anonymity of urban life. Being alone in a big city makes
me feel powerful. It’s not strange to be alone in a big city, it’s an
accomplishment. It means I’ve mastered the streets and subways and
buildings and crowds; that I’ve become an insider; that I have, like the
thousands of individuals around me, became part of a dynamic whole. When
I’m alone in the Midwest, even in Minneapolis, I don’t feel part of
anything greater, I just feel alone. Other people say they feel so “at
home” here, but they’re at home with their doors closed, and no one has
invited me in.

{{% pullquote %}}How did we end up here? I didn’t actually ask the painting out loud, but I looked at _Mural_ a long time.{{% /pullquote %}}

So in my worst moments, all I see is that everyone else’s contentment
has made me feel excluded. It makes me hate it here. It makes me wish
I’d worked harder to build a life in a more exciting place. And it makes
me feel sorry for the magnificent, game-changing painting Peggy
Guggenheim sent to molder in a cultural desert, a city with little to
offer its young people on a Friday night but a hot dog cart and a chance
to drink beer outdoors in the warm summer breeze, a city just across the
river from a place whose greatest attraction is a beaver in the middle
of the road.

How did we end up here? I didn’t actually ask the painting out loud, but
I looked at *Mural* a long time. I thought about the brilliant,
alcoholic genius who created it; I thought about New York City in the
1940s; and I thought about what it means to end up in a place where
you’ll never really click. A place where people keep noticing that
you’re different, but don’t understand who you really are. Do people get
that you’re a treasure? I thought as I stared at Pollock’s fantastic
canvas. Do they even know you’re here? My friends had wandered off. I
was alone in the gallery, feeling the hum of the air control system and
the subtle vibration of the lighting fixtures. I kept staring at the
painting. Are you lonely? I wished there were a way to ask.

*Mural* is only temporarily at home in Davenport. It was moved from the
University of Iowa after floods in 2008 destroyed the university museum.
Eventually it will return to the dignity of at least being housed in a
university town with a considerable reputation as a literary center,
although Iowa City is even smaller than Davenport and similarly hard to
reach. Even with the connection to the university, the move to Iowa did
not enhance the painting’s reputation. Decades after Clement Greenberg
proclaimed *Mural* a masterpiece, art critic Thomas Crow wrote, “If the
painting remains underestimated in the literature, it may be because of
its remote location at the University of Iowa.”

So it’s not just me. And while I am not in a position to judge *Mural*’s
place in the “literature,” I trust Thomas Crow. Because even in my best
moments and despite the fact that in 30 years here I’ve found wonderful
friends and countless sources of delight, I still have to fight my
instinctive prejudice about anything that happens to be located in the
Midwest: if it’s all that good, what is it doing here?

{{% figure src="/images/volume-iv-issue-2/mural.jpg" caption="“Mural,” oil and casein on canvas, 8’ X 13’ by Jackson Pollock, 1943. Image courtesy of www.jackson-pollock.org" %}}

\* \* \*

After the excitement of seeing the beaver in Rock Island, my friends and
I returned to Davenport, where a riverboat casino had docked just a
little ways upstream from the Figge. We wandered in and spent about 30
minutes. The rooms were dimly lit; the walls painted dull beige, mottled
with greasy streaks and scuff marks; the red carpet was faded and worn.
The clientele were almost entirely senior citizens. Most wore pastel
polyester stretch pants and clutched cigarettes in one hand as they used
the other to feed quarters into the electronic slot machines. “Where
Hope Goes to Die” suddenly seemed prophetic. The denizens of the casino
were a depressing counterpoint to the young people we had seen out on
the town the night before.

I am willing to concede that Davenport might be a lovelier place than my
friends and I were able to discern in the 40 or so hours we spent there.
I still think it’s a disappointing home for *Mural*, and I don’t view
the move back to Iowa City as a huge step up. In the same way, I still
feel that Minnesota is a disappointing home for me. My life in the
Midwest is hardly a cause for existential despair, but I don’t click
here. I’m not sure that living in this place has allowed me to become my
best, most interesting self. Of course, the failure of life to meet
expectations is not solely due to physical location. *Mural* is still a
masterpiece even though it makes its home in Iowa.

On its own website, the University of Iowa admits that “\[j\]ust why
Guggenheim chose to give *Mural* to Iowa has been a matter of some
speculation.” I recently learned that Jackson Pollock’s parents were
both from Tingley, Iowa, a small town about 250 miles southwest of
Davenport. I have no reason to think Peggy Guggenheim was aware of that
fact when she sent her painting to Iowa, no reason to think Jackson
Pollock felt any particular connection to his parents’ home state. But
the fact that Pollock had roots in Iowa makes *Mural’s* location seem a
bit less random.

We all end up somewhere, and in the end there’s a lot to be said for
knowing how to bloom where you’re planted. Not that I’ve developed an
interest in gardening. But I’ve gotten better at navigating the broad
Midwestern streets, at puncturing the bubble wrap and making some
connections. I don’t love the Midwest; I advise my adult children to
think carefully about where they will live their lives; and I spend as
much time as I can outside of Minnesota. But on the other hand I am
lucky: I have four friends here who were willing to travel 300 miles
with me just to see a painting.
