How he grabbed his chest, and then fell backwards onto the concrete.

How the pupils in his beautiful blue eyes dilated, and how she screamed
his name just before she started CPR. How the white liquid poured from
his mouth as she phoned the paramedics. I don’t tell this unless I must.
I wasn’t there. For a long time, because I wasn’t there, it might not
have happened. For a long time, I couldn’t say he’d died, I’d just pause
between words and say: he…left.

Grief is dislocation, and sometimes I think my soul is like Tony’s,
dislocated by his...leaving.

I don’t tell how Emily pushed on his chest and breathed into his
beautiful mouth and how she knew he was gone.

*I knew he was gone,* she tells me, the day after, *because there was
nothing in his eyes, his eyes relaxed into the blue, and I knew he was
gone.*

I don’t tell this, but I imagine it: his heart, his ascending aortic
artery as it gave way, filling his insides with his lovely hot blood,
red, highly pressured, filling up his off-limits insides where it
shouldn’t go.

I don’t tell this to anyone: that I hope he had a soul, and that I hope,
that when it needed to leave its casing he was as satisfied by the
leaving as he was in living, and that he was held in the arms of the
universe as he left, making that satisfied Tony-face, floating above as
his wife dialed 911, as she called his father, as she dropped the phone
and her voice rose into the air senseless and screaming like a frantic
bird.

When I try to tell it, or come close, people’s faces become chasms that
cannot be resolved, just as uncertain as my parents were when I told
them. People don’t know how to respond, and ambushed by my honesty they
are reduced to statues, uncertain, and this inverts them. I’ve tried to
apologize after telling them, but this doesn’t return them to a resting
state, and I fear this unalterably dislocates them.

I don’t tell how we stood outside of that same house he died behind,
four days before, smoking and smoking and smoking.

*We’ll make tube amplifiers. Basement kits,* he said, *the kind that
come in the mail.*

He was 36 days into his marriage, his sons, three and two years old, and
we stood there under the light of the antique street lamps of St. Paul.
We stood there talking about what we’d do next.

I don’t want to tell any of this.

I need to tell all of this, but I’m too tired to continue my new
ambassadorship today, and most days.

Sometimes it seems like life is direction, a purpose - and death,
without that purpose, a dislocation. The grief of us, left behind, isn’t
sadness, it’s disorientation. For me, it’s a particularly gruesome
disorientation: probing and discovering that part of me wasn’t me, but
who I was in his reflection.

Whatever I thought was me has been unseated, and what remains isn’t
exactly me, either. Today, I don’t want to be his ambassador, but who am
I, without him, besides that ambassador?

At least 3 miles before I go home.

Since he’s gone, I’ve stopped smoking. I’ve replaced it with
treadmilling, and running around a track at the university gym.

Sitting on my knit oatmeal-colored couch after work, the feelings start
to come in through the cracks in the null that grief has created and
surrounded me with. I don’t want to feel them, and grief doesn’t want me
to, either. It’s protective. As the mists of emotion start to get thick,
I don’t see the butcher’s block in the kitchen, the squat robot of my
television, or the oatmeal couch around me.

Afraid that emotion will catch me unprepared, I grab my keys, and rush
to the gym. Feelings are parsed out better atop a treadmill. Somehow
they’re filtered. If they cause me to cry, it’s just a river of tears.
On the treadmill, or turning circles around the track, I trust that I
won’t totally lose my self.

As I walk through the double doors I convince myself it’s not avoidance,
but a safe decanting of what I need to let come out. Down the stairs, I
bypass the treadmills, headed upstairs.

A class of rock climbers unfolds up a faux-rock wall in front of me as I
walk past. They’re belted in, red ropes tied to metal clips in the
mottled brown of the wall, feet splayed above them, tentatively touching
the wall, in tiny clown-colored shoes, bits of rubber on the toes.

I walk past the squash courts, in front of a Hispanic woman on an
elliptical, a frantic and too-skinny college girl on a stair climber,
nervously looking at me as I walk by, quickly looking away. I hear
people upstairs bouncing basketballs and I go through the doors, I get
my towel from the towel-bin.

I walk past beer-gutted men reading magazines in
exercise-bicycle-recliners, turn a corner by the pilates people speaking
pilates-ese on unrolled mats, through a door, and up flights of stairs
to the third floor track that overlooks the basketball court.

There are two teams using the court, scheduled games with
scorekeeper-lit signs, red lightbulbs, studying students on the
sidelines, but instead I see him, I remember him in the eye of my
memory, and counter-clock-wise, I start to run.

Tony, under the 280 bridge, fifty feet from the train tracks, earnest
face, Lincoln-on-Rushmore nose, eyes following me, talking to me,
fingers fast on the frets of his upright bass under the shadow of the
bridge. I look down and see my hundred-and-fifty-dollar left-handed
acoustic guitar. I’m puzzling my way through some Bosso, fumbling
half-chords and single-string melodies.

Matty leans into the picture in my mind, trying some poetry over us. He
stumbles onto a vein of rhythmic words and digs in and Tony hears it,
catches the rhythm in the frets of his bass, and together we make sense,
sonically.

Tony swings his bulk closer to the bend in the bass, he moves closer to
it like a woman going in for a kiss, big and graceful, and I see his
eyes light as his notes follow my Bosso, as my Bosso blends into his
notes, and his mahogany hair’s falling into his so-blue eyes, but I can
still see them. We’re all together, with each other in the Bosso, with
each other in the words.

It feels like it lasts, like we’re slipping into timelessness, and then
a container truck blows its horn on the bridge above us and Matty
falters. The wind catches his words, juggling them, and Tony doubles
down, fingers riding the hard black ebony of the bass’ fretboard, trying
to catch Matty’s words back from the wind as they wobble. I’m pounding
the strings but the Bosso won’t come out, I can’t put our togetherness
back together, and the cohesion we’ve created is tearing.

The world and the wind pushes their way into our circle, and the moment
is gone, it falls apart. It’s only us again, doing a Friday, and we look
up at each other and at the bridge, and the stars above us in the deep
blue and I realize I’m sweating from playing too hard, and the
streetlights are coming on, and Tony smiles, sharing it all with me.

Matty yells *Fuck!* and it echoes through the underside of the bridge
and I laugh. I reach out for Tony, relieved that whatever it was is gone
and we’re back to Just Friends, doing a Friday, not trying to hold it
up, keep whatever it was spinning in the air with some magic between us.
Tony has a cigarette in his mouth and he’s lighting it around his bass,
still hugging the maple of it and Matty comes over to get a cigarette
from me, reaching into my front shirt pocket unbidden, and as I smile my
guitar slides, goes side-saddle, like a wooden infant on my hip. We’re
an accidental triangle, my palm, flat on Tony’s chest, across his
upright bass, his arm around the high-middle of Matty’s back, and we
stand there for a moment, laughing into each other, out of breath,
sweating, looking in each other’s eyes, sharing and enjoying some
satisfied exultation, lighting and smoking our cigarettes.

I’m in bed. I start crying. It’s a surprise, this swell of emotion and
water, and I search in my mind for a reason. Donna Reed has just come on
the television, and Mr. Ed will follow.

Last week I was ambushed by the same swell, Fred Astaire-ing around my
house, dancing in socks on a hardwood floor, twirling, Swing music loud
on my stereo. The vintage tubes from my covetously old amplifier light
up the dark corner of my living room, playing on the spines of art books
on my bookshelf: a fragment of Basquiat, a sliver of Rothko, the bottom
of the spine of Gerhard Richter. I pretend-ice-skate-on-imagined-pond in
my stockinged feet on the hardwood floor, hands clasped behind me like
the children skating in the Charlie Brown Christmas Special.

Just like now, I started crying. Tears out of nowhere —and that
feeling—what did I forget? Why am I crying? And just like now, searching
for the why, finding nothing, trying to convince myself that it must be
Tony, it must be because of Tony, and my obsessive mind reaches for
connections. In our post-high-school-music-combo we’d sketched out a
cover Skating by Vince Guaraldi, Tony playing the bottom half of the
piano on his bass, me daintily finger-walking the melody on a delayed
Fender Jazzmaster, but we’d never played it more than a few times at
practice, and never completely. We’d get halfway through, realize we
were sort of doing it, making it work, and the groove would fall apart
in our hands, and we’d fall apart in laughter that we’d done it, sort of
successfully.

This must be why I’m crying, I thought. Jazz on the hifi +
pretend-ice-skating on hardwood with my hands clasped behind my back =
somehow that thwarts my usual avoidance of the fact that Tony’s dead. My
brain rejects, this, and the otherness—the extra voice that OCD creates
talks back: OCD is typified by odd connections, and the emotional weight
within.

I remember this, and still have no idea why right now I’m crying in bed
with Donna Reed on my television, or why last week, atop my
stocking-skates I’m ambushed by emotion. Are these only other Crying
Commutes?

In bed I circumvent the sobs. I say out loud:

*Oh, Tony.*

This sounds too intimate, like we were lovers, or I’m his mother, and I
think of his mother, medicated, diving into a messy dissolve when I see
her at the gravesite.

*How are you,* she says, and she doesn’t care. I don’t mind that she
doesn’t care. He son’s death is a bell, constantly ringing, taking her
out of every conversation, interrupting, and she’s looked lost inside
since he left. I’m surprised that she can’t find her place, and in a
flash of memory she’s letting the dogs out at 4AM, smoking a long white
cigarette as Tony and I arrive back at his house, just coming in from
the night, and then we’re in Forest Lawn, and she kneels over Tony’s
grave to wipe away some speck of something I can’t see, and maybe
there’s nothing there, and she says: *Oh, Tony;* and she’s gone again,
vacant, inside. Her new husband walks tentatively to her and rests a
hand on her shoulder, and looks around for someone to tell him what to
do as he stands on Tony’s grave.

In bed, I say his name, and this doesn’t stop the sobbing. It sounds
strangely intimate, and I’m don’t mind that so much anymore. I’m saying
his name, and taking breath in, and pushing it out. I say it over and
again:

*Tony. Tony.* I make up permutations of his name, sing-songing in the
way I repeat things. *Tony. Tony. T-Billy, Tyrone,* and suddenly the
plastic overlay, the neutrality and dissassociation of grief is rolled
back, and I’m assaulted by feelings, and they’ve got me crying, they’ve
turned me into a stutterer: *Tah-Tah-Tony. *

It’s 5AM. I’m saying his names, casting them like a spell to stop me
crying, and Donna Reed is on the television.

I hear his first girlfriend, Christina, say his name at a party in the
darkness of my basement, questioning: *Tony – where are you, in the
dark? *

I hear his mother yelling it to us atop the stairs, as we replay songs
we’ve made in the basement studio. *Tony! Cut out that boom, boom, boom
shit! I can’t have you this loud in the morning!*

I think of the darkness in my life since he’s left, and the darkness of
my imaginings of the afterlife, lonely, cold, both together: algid, like
the clouds in my forever-death-image.

I imagine my neighbors hearing me slapping my chest and singing nonsense
in my bed, and my voice falters halfway through, and then I don’t care
about the neighbors. I do care, but not enough to not sing his name, and
this brings me further back from crying, into a wide smile
underneath/separate from the tears that stand as big as statues on my
face.

I slap my naked chest twice, singing his roulette of names. I start
laughing because it’s so ridiculous. *T-Billy. T-Billy. Tyrone.* The
tears turn off.

I’m not alone. He’s here with me—in his name. Donna Reed is still on the
television. Mr. Ed will still follow.

It feels like I’ve said his name more in the last three years without
him than I did in the 27 years I had him. I like saying his name more
now, and I’m in that place between crying and laughing, and I slap my
chest and say his name louder: as an incantation, an adage, a precept, a
battle cry.

trillion raindrops fall, according to *USA Today*, during the average
thunderstorm, none of which are teardrop shaped. The actual shapes of
raindrops range from tiny spheroids to middling hamburger bun shapes, to
thin parachutes of water with a tube-shaped drop towards their bases.

This knowledge is elegant, sundry, and terribly amusing, but at this
moment, on the scooter, only conjecture; I don’t feel the marching army
of raindrops as they storm down the beach of my head, as I sit on my
scooter waiting for a stoplight to change.

Earlier, a camera watched me as I cried my way through ninety minutes on
the treadmill - another version of the Crying Commute. The only common
denominators were the music, the movement (one the actual movement of my
limbs, the other, only movement across space and time), and my dissolve
into laughter. This time, my smile came because I imagine the bored gym
attendants folding towels, watching the monitor screens like
televisions, the way you’ll watch anything to arrest boredom.

*Look at that fat guy on the treadmill,* they might say. *He’s working
out so hard that he’s crying.* I imagine another attendant looking up at
the monitor from her phone in her hand. *Aw, poor guy,* she might say.

This imagined scene made me laugh, then cry, then laugh all over again.
I imagined Tony, like an immense cumulous cloud on the horizon in May,
his arms resting on the broccoli forests in the deciduous belt of
Minnesota that we lived in for so many years together, together, his
confident face and awkward, too-long fingers—

(Jack Kerouac: “Sweet face—hard to describe…swaying to the beat, tall,
majestical,”)

And it doesn’t matter what teardrops or raindrops are shaped like. I
know they’re there, but I can’t feel them, and I wonder where Tony is,
if Tony is.

I don’t know if he’s really here, or if I just tell myself that I feel
him. Some days it matters if he is, and others it only matters that I
remember what it was like to be with him.

On the scooter, I look up at the sky. The rain coming down makes it feel
like I’m traveling fast, the way light-speed is shown in science fiction
movies, but I’m anchored, waiting for the stoplight. This is what life
is like: feeling permanent, when we’re all just waiting. This is what
life is like: accepting the illusion of permanence, and not missing the
brilliance of being here, the uniqueness, while we wait; finding the
beauty as the sorrow passes us by, the beauty through the sorrow.

I look across the street. The road is empty, and I’m still waiting. I’m
raw from the crying and the laughing, still waiting, ready to move. The
scooter doesn’t weigh enough to trigger the light, and the light never
changes. I just decide to go. A substantial part of the guilt that I’ve
been holding calves off—that I’m still here, at the stoplight, on the
Earth, in his children’s lives, and he’s not, and that I can’t see any
reason that all of this should be as it is—releases from my body in
waves like a flood over the prairie that surrounds me as I stop waiting
for the light to change.
