---
title: "Cheyenne Bottoms"
subtitle: "The Indispensible Kansas Wetland You Never Knew About"
date: 2019-07-11T21:19:12-07:00
draft: false
author: "Alicia DeHaan"
articletype: "Essay"
headerimage: "cheyenne-bottoms.jpg"
headshot:
authorbio:
description: "During the yearly migration, an astonishing forty-five percent of all North American shorebirds pass through this Kansas marsh."
---

The Sandhill crane's weary wing beats carry him along with the flock,
lower and lower, closer to the mud flats where the flock will rest
before continuing its migration. The setting sun glints off shallow
water, adding a rosy glow to the gray and brown of the crane's
outstretched wings. As the flock banks and descends, the air is filled
with the calls of ducks, geese, herons, egrets, and the many shorebirds
that are also visiting the marsh to rest and refuel. An incredible
forty-five percent of all North American shorebirds arrive at this
Kansas marsh, known as [Cheyenne Bottoms](https://ksoutdoors.com/KDWPT-Info/Locations/Wildlife-Areas/Southwest/Cheyenne-Bottoms),
each year during their spring and fall migrations. Cheyenne Bottoms, the
largest inland marsh in the United States, is vitally important to the
survival of many shorebirds. It also brings 60,000 people to the area
each year, providing an opportunity for both children and adults to
learn about the importance of wetlands and the animals who live there.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/cheyenne-bottoms/cheyenne-bottoms-1.jpg" caption="American white pelicans, cormorants, gulls and assorted other waterfowl gather on a spit at Cheyenne Bottoms. photos by Kaleb Kroeker unless otherwise noted" %}}

Although few would guess it, Kansas contains one of the most crucial
shorebird stopping places in the western hemisphere. Each spring tiny
western sandpipers, weighing only 0.8 to 1.2 ounces, leave their winter
homes in the south to fly from 900 to 2,500 miles to reach their Alaskan
breeding grounds. These diminutive sandpipers must be able to find areas
of marsh, swamp, or beach where they can rest and store body fat to
accomplish their marathon migration. If the birds are unable to find
enough food in one spot, they will be forced to stop again. Too much
delay will cause the birds to arrive late to their summer breeding
grounds. If too much of the short Arctic summer has been wasted, some of
the birds may choose not to mate. Since the United States contains only
three large shorebird stopping places east of the Rockies, Cheyenne
Bottoms is clearly indispensable.

If you visit Cheyenne Bottoms in late October or early November, in
addition to seeing many ducks, geese, and various shorebirds, you might
be lucky enough to spot an endangered whooping crane. In 1941 these tall
white cranes numbered only sixteen. Now there are nearly 300, partly
thanks to safe havens like Cheyenne Bottoms. Other protected or
endangered species that visit the marsh are the bald eagle, piping
plover, and peregrine falcon. The wetlands have been designated as a
critical habitat for both whooping cranes and the interior least tern.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/cheyenne-bottoms/cheyenne-bottoms-2.jpg" caption="A black-necked stilt working the shallows at Cheyenne Bottoms." %}}

Before the arrival of Francisco Coronado, only the native Indian tribes,
such as the Cheyenne, after whom Cheyenne Bottoms is named, knew of this
place. Although other explorers visited the region, and large numbers of
settlers began arriving in Kansas by 1854, it was not until the 1920s
that anyone felt moved to find out more about the thousands of birds
that arrived at the Bottoms each year.

Frank W. Robl, a farmer from the Ellinwood area, began banding birds at
Cheyenne in 1924. He caught birds with nets or traps that would not harm
them. Once a bird was caught, he secured a small metal band, containing
his contact information, around one of the bird's legs. He hoped
someone, maybe a hunter, would recover the bird and return the band to
him, so he could determine how far the banded birds had journeyed. Robl
found that the birds he'd banded at Cheyenne Bottoms had flown to Kansas
from all over North America.

{{% pullquote %}}Kansas contains one of the most crucial shorebird stopping places in the western hemisphere.{{% /pullquote %}}

Robl was astonished at the returns he collected, receiving them from as
far away as Alaska, South Carolina, and California, while other birds
were recovered in Mexico and Honduras. Beside satisfying his own
curiosity, Robl's work served another purpose. He spoke at the State
Wildlife Conference about preserving Cheyenne Bottoms for migrating
birds, and when he was offered a few minutes on a national radio program
in 1934, he told a million people about the marsh. Others who were
interested in creating a wildlife refuge at Cheyenne joined with Robl to
testify before the Senate Committee on Wildlife, and he even contacted
then-Vice President Charles Curtis. In response to these efforts,
Congress promised \$350,000 for construction of dikes, roads, and
hunting blinds for sportsmen, so Cheyenne Bottoms could be properly
managed. However, because of the Depression, only \$50,000 were made
available. Despite this setback, Robl's dedicated banding of nearly
19,000 birds over a quarter of a century showed the world how important
Cheyenne Bottoms was and helped protect the wetlands for many more
generations of birds.

In 1966, Edmund Martinez became interested in banding the birds of
Cheyenne Bottoms. Since Robl had banded very few shorebirds, when
Martinez began banding birds, only 349 shorebirds had been banded in all
North America. Over the next twelve years, Martinez banded over 58,000
birds from 32 species. His northernmost return came from Siberia and his
southernmost from Argentina. A 1974 shorebird survey in which Martinez
participated found that no other place, from Texas to North Dakota, had
even ten percent the number of shorebirds that visited Cheyenne Bottoms.
When the data from the two men's research was combined, it became clear
that the wetlands was a vital oasis for migrating birds.

{{% pullquote %}}Over the next twelve years, Martinez banded over 58,000 birds from 32 species. His northernmost return came from Siberia, and his southernmost from Argentina.{{% /pullquote %}}

In a *New York Times* interview, Martinez said: "It's remarkable what
passes through Cheyenne Bottoms, sandpipers that winter in Tierra del
Fuego and breed in Siberia. I got to hold them in my hand and marvel at
how they do it. To get returns on birds that I banded from northern
Russia and South America, it really put into perspective what is going
on here in the center of Kansas. These small birds are the best athletes
in the world." (Laux).

Not only does Cheyenne Bottoms provide shelter and food for many
animals, it also draws many people to Kansas, opens a door for people to
learn about this very special wetland ecosystem, and brings \$2.8
million into the state's economy annually. Each year, 60,000 people
visit Cheyenne Bottoms, some drawn by the [Wings n' Wetlands](http://wetlandscenter.fhsu.edu/wings-n-wetlands-birding-festival)
birding festival which is held every other year at the marsh. Visitors
to Cheyenne Bottoms can hike on a nature trail, listen to guided tours,
and explore displays inside a Wetlands Education Center.

Cheyenne Bottoms is an essential link in the yearly migration for tens
of thousands of birds. Without the dedicated work of Frank Robl and
Edmund Martinez who showed the world how significant this Kansas marsh
is to the survival of many North American shorebirds, this might not be
the case. Robel and Martinez, who invested their lives in studying,
understanding, and protecting Cheyenne Bottoms, have made it possible
for us to visit the marsh, see the sun sparkle on the shallow water,
hear the raucous calling of geese, and crane our necks to see flocks of
thousands wheel in the sky. We can marvel at their migration journey and
should do what we can to ensure that the waypoint they rely on will
always be here to welcome them.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/cheyenne-bottoms/cheyenne-bottoms-4.jpg" caption="Bank swallows at Cheyenne Bottoms." %}}