---
title: "Extraction, Roots, Energy, and The Plains"
subtitle:
date: 2019-07-12T16:11:00-07:00
draft: false
author: "Sebastian Braun"
articletype: "Essay"
headerimage: "extraction-roots-energy-plains.jpg"
headshot:
authorbio:
---


People in exile are experts on roots and energy. They know how much
energy is needed to extract roots, how much energy is needed to stay
uprooted, and, because a state of uprootedness is unsustainable over the
long run, how much to sink roots deep into the ground again.

I remember standing in North Dakota and looking toward the horizon. One
can actually see Earth as a globe - the slight curve of the horizon,
where the winds come from that bend the grass and the few trees, and
where the clouds gather that sweep overhead, only to disappear again and
make way for the blue sky. Sometimes, looking toward the horizon, I
would feel an overwhelming joy, seeing mountains in the distance. It was
usually a short emotion, as I realized that my mind had played tricks.
Those were not mountains, could not be mountains. They were clouds that
had swept me away toward home, mirroring a more familiar landscape.

Living on the Great Plains costs a lot of energy. The sky overhead is
endless, and the people are exposed to that sky as if on a plate.
Shelter becomes more than a physical necessity. Humility in the face of
this force is self-imposing and sometimes overpowering. There is a
connection between people and nature, because everybody is exposed to
forces that cannot be tamed or understood. At least, that is, until
people started to surround themselves with constant shelter, as if to
avoid having to look into that sky, to acknowledge the force, to be
humble. Instead, they could now disconnect themselves from nature, think
of themselves as superior, and think of distance in miles per hour,
hurtling themselves quicker and quicker through the landscape they no
longer needed to acknowledge, ripping up all their roots, at least the
long, deep, strong roots that hold the grasses in place against the
winds. Instead, they now plowed the earth and selected what roots were
allowed to grow. And all of this cost even more energy because to be
without roots requires one to levitate in place, nothing but a fleeting
shadow over the land, which has become but an abstraction, no longer
real because it is just land. There is no distinct smell of the earth,
no change in winds that herald rain, no experience of seasonality, no
need to observe closely how its other inhabitants behave, no sharing of
the landscape with them. Kinship and its obligations have been narrowed
to the people in the shelter, and has been turned against those outside
the shelter. And so, with the extraction of roots comes the need to
extract more and more energy.

Energy has become visualized for me in the form of long trains of black
tank cars and coal tenders moving across the plains. When we lived in
North Dakota, they were parked right next to the campus of the
university where I taught, and I often wondered what would happen if the
oil wagons exploded like they had done in Lac Megantique
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lac-M%C3%A9gantic\_rail\_disaster) and
right outside Casselton. Now that I live in Iowa, the same wagons rumble
by our house about five times a week. Here, they are loaded with
ethanol, not oil or coal, but the image of energy being transported to
markets is the same. The Prairie-Plains are the heart that sends fuel to
the outliers. It is a restless procession of long trains, traveling
through places that try to still be rooted, yet are more and more
depopulated. People and grass have been uprooted and swept away, and
even those who have stayed behind need heavy machinery to anchor them
down, now that the roots are mostly gone and the shelterbelts are
disappearing.

There are other ways that the energy flows, of course. Pipelines cross
the Plains like a vast network of pulsating arteries. Not veins,
however, as there is not much coming back. Invisible, those lines are
connected to the new artificial roots of hydraulic fracturing. These
roots fan out from wells, which draw different nutrients out of the
Earth, nutrients for the industrialized society. However, just like the
roots of water-hungry plants, these new kinds of roots are also thirsty.
They are thirsty for poisonous nutrients---oil and gas---that they
extract, but they also put poisons into the Earth. Toxic materials are
mixed into the water that is used for fracturing the rocks, and
fracturing wells are extremely thirsty. In 2016, a well in the Bakken
oil field (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bakken\_Formation) required 5.5
million gallons of water, while one in the Permian basin used 11.2
million gallons of water. In August of 2018, the Bakken had 12,571
producing oil wells. Some of this "water", too, will flow back out. This
is now called *produced water*, but it really has not much in common
anymore with water. It is about twenty times saltier than ocean water,
slightly radioactive, and highly toxic. Apart from its use in the
artificial roots of hydraulic fracturing, it can not be allowed to ever
come into contact with other roots. This brine needs to be disposed of,
hopefully for ever, and it is usually injected back into the Earth. In
the United States, about 180,000 Class II injection wells pump over 2
billion gallons of fluids into the Earth every day, most of them in the
southern Plains. What happens when these fluids are not injected deep
enough or break free from their layers can be seen on the Fort Peck
Indian Reservation (http://www.fortpecktribes.org) in Montana. Here, an
underground brine plume has been migrating slowly through water wells
for the past 40 years, a legacy of injection practices in the 1970s.
Slowly spreading toward Poplar and the Missouri River, the only solution
for this catastrophe has been to try and pump it to the surface again,
and then to inject it deeper.

The pulse of this network has become constant beneath the soil, and in
some places, it has become so strong that it regularly causes small
earthquakes. Whether or not these pulses will eventually set the liquids
free is a matter of debate that will only be shown by time. If, however,
any of the produced waters make their way to the grass roots, people,
plants, and animals will have to leave. Under the ground sleeps the
greatest danger to communities. It might be a telling sign that a break
in a produced water pipeline is much more impactful than a break in an
oil pipeline.

The Prairie-Plains have become the roots for the United States, where
wheat, oil, soybeans, corn, and coal are extracted from the soil to feed
the cities far away. Not much thought is spent on the roots. They are
often regarded as boring and colorless and are taken for granted. Eighty
years ago, during the Dust Bowl
(https://www.history.com/topics/great-depression/dust-bowl), the nation
did come to realize that it had better pay attention to the roots when
the topsoil was flying away. One of the best kept secrets of the Plains
lies in Denbigh, North Dakota, an assembly of houses off the main road
to Minot. Across that road stands the Denbigh Experimental Forest
(https://www.fs.usda.gov/recarea/dpg/recarea/?recid=80604). At first, it
might come as a surprise that the ground in the forest is mostly sand.
This sand is not the leftover of a prehistoric beach or long-ago
glacier, but the result of much more recent overgrazing and
over-plowing. In fact, the forest was planted as a grand plan to save
the soil. It was one part of the national response to the destruction of
the plains grass-, range-, and farmlands. The original plan called for
planting a series of 100 mile long shelterbelts, a mile apart, over more
than a thousand miles from North Dakota to Texas. While this plan was
eventually given up, between 1935 and 1942, the Forest Service planted
220 million trees in the Plains. Denbigh was to be one of the nurseries
for these trees. Standing in the midst of these trees in the middle of
nowhere, a tree island in a sea of industrialized agriculture, I found
it hard not to think of the imagined and real root systems holding the
soil and people in place and to compare it to the oil boom ongoing a
hundred miles further west. There are no Denbigh forests, no designed
areas of seeds to fan out and protect the land against this new kind of
industrialized havoc.

The Denbigh trees were and still are an illustration of the
possibilities to make roots. Like plants, animals and people can become
rooted in a place. Humans do that by establishing a relationship with a
place: by listening to the landscape and its inhabitants. The stories
that we learn and share in this process are our roots, they hold us to
the places we engage with. It is hard to say how long it takes to become
rooted. A few generations is my guess. Once we know the stories of all
the places around, above, and below us, we are rooted. By that time, we
are also rooted in the ground because our ancestors have related to the
same places. Rooted knowing is not knowledge formally learned, but
sensually experienced. It is the knowledge of how the dirt smells and
feels and tastes after a rainstorm. It is the ability to find one's way
through the landscape of stories. It is the skill to predict the weather
by looking out the window and to estimate distances by how long it takes
to walk along the contours of the land. And it is to understand that
that we humans are just one of the parts in any place that we live, to
be humble before greater forces with great and small powers. The energy
of place is tied to roots, but those are the roots of community, not
extraction.

When I was younger, I used to mountain bike on the mountain behind the
house where I lived in Switzerland. There is a place there where the
trees give way to a cliff, and there I can experience my home. Looking
out over the Sundgau, I can see the Belchendreieck, the mythical
triangle of mountains in the Vosges, the Black Forest, and the Jura that
served as an astronomical calendar and a place power grid to the people
before me. Looking west and north, there are possibilities of openness,
promises of adventure, and winds of chance. I always longed to know what
lay beyond the next ridge. The Plains, although topographically the
opposite of my home in Switzerland, remind me of it, possibly because
they offer an endless opportunity to go farther, a constant draw toward
the horizon. Perhaps that is why I fell in love with the Plains the
first time I traveled them.

Few things are better than lying awake at night in a tent, smelling the
sage, and watching the thunderstorms on the horizon parade by. Some
people tell me that there is nothing on the Plains, that it is fly-over
and drive-through country. They have never taken the dirt tracks to
watch pelicans on remote lakes, have never gotten stuck in Plains gumbo,
have never observed ground squirrels playing around their tent. These
days, I too hurry through the Plains to get places, and sometimes I feel
a pain for passing by all the places that I know lie right over the
hills, in beautiful valleys, away from the interstates and the
industrial fields. There is nothing as depressing as a flattened, brown,
industrialized, ploughed landscape devoid of roots. There is nothing as
beautiful as a wide river valley with a sprinkling of savannah trees. To
allow and make people see this beauty, we need to open the land to the
public, to allow people onto the land, not in small, enclosed parcels,
but in continuous flows, traveled in days, experienced close at hand.
Observed, listened to, smelled, and tasted.

Ironically---or perhaps not at all---those landscapes would also provide
us with material energy. The energy returned over energy invested ratio
for all those wagons full of corn ethanol that roll behind my house is
lousy and unsustainable. Instead of plowing up the Native roots and
replacing them every year with corn to provide to pigs and to distill
into ethanol, the best use of this landscape would be to turn it back
into switchgrass prairie. Ethanol production from switchgrass is about 5
to 6 times more efficient than ethanol production from corn. And while
currently the research is directed at switchgrass monocultures, a true
prairie flora could probably be used for the purpose, too. A green
economy for Iowa would see the restoration of switchgrass prairies and
the harvest of the grass for ethanol production. That would also allow
the restoration of roots to the land and a diverse plant and animal
habitat. Sustainably planted islands of edible corn in this prairie
instead of diminutive islands of prairie in a desert of corn and
soybeans would still produce food. In the coming years, agriculture,
just like everything else, will need to adjust to massive changes in
climate and in energy use. We all need to re-learn to live with the land
instead of against it. We will all need to re-learn the value of roots
and how to maintain them.

I am not advocating for a return to pre-industrial life; wind power
generation will have to be a part of the solution on the Plains and
Prairies. Wind turbines are rooted like prairie grasses and like the
farmers who take care of the land. Instead of clearing the land of its
roots, however, and watch people, native plants, animals, and everything
else be swept away from it in the name of industry, we should emphasize
this caretaking function of farming. In order to see prairie caretaking
as farming, we need to redefine the meaning of the term, farming. But
farming as caretaking of the landscape instead of industrial extraction
of resources would restore the powers of roots and enable those same
roots to care for people. Instead of seeing that as a threat to farmers,
I see it as a restoration of the true meaning of farming. Until
industrialization, farming did not mean to rip out roots, but planting
roots and at the same time taking care of existing root systems,
nurturing the land for plants, animals, and communities.

Ironically, people in exile are experts on roots. What we have learned
is that roots cannot be forced. Roots need to grow naturally. If we
allow them to grow, over time, patiently, listening and observing and
learning, then we will be able to harvest their true energy.