---
title: "Little Prairie On The Freeway"
subtitle:
date: 2019-07-12T15:20:00-7:00
draft: false
author: "Cindy Crosby"
articletype: "Essay"
headerimage:
headshot:
authorbio:
---

> *I am only one, but still I am one. I cannot do everything, but still I can do something. And because I cannot do everything, I will not refuse to do the something I can do.*

Edward Everett Hale  
*The Book of Good Cheer*

Strong winds. Gray skies. A cold drizzle. Not an optimal day to go for a
prairie hike. But you hike when you have time to hike, and weather be
hanged. Today, [Hinsdale Prairie](https://www.facebook.com/hinsdaleprairie) steward Kath Thomas has
promised me a tour of a prairie remnant, just down the street from her
house. Not much more than an acre, it's a tiny remnant island adrift in
a sea of development.

What's a prairie remnant? Simply put, it's a piece of the original
tallgrass prairie that has not been plowed or destroyed. Illinois once
had 22 million acres of tallgrass prairie; only about 2,300 high quality
acres remain. Other Midwestern states have even more dismal statistics.
These remnants are often tucked into old cemeteries, or the corners of
farm fields. Along railroad tracks. On rocky hilltops unsuitable for
plowing. Or, places like this alongside a freeway that escaped notice.

Mowers have knocked back the prairie on the freeway side and it's been
trimmed back along the sidewalk which flanks it on the west. There's a
roar of traffic from the freeway. The din is overwhelming. A
prairie---here? Really? If there is birdsong, it's erased by the sounds
of trucks. And yet...you feel it. This is a special place.

As we hike, Kath points out the bluebird houses. Anybody home? Nope, not
today. Too late in the season. As we brush aside the tallgrass and hike
deeper into the prairie, the real treasures emerge. Over here, spent
prairie gentians. To the left, prairie dropseed, lime-colored for
autumn. Just ahead, the bloomed-out spikes of Liatris, blazing star,
with a few ballet-skirted seedheads of Echinacea; pale purple
coneflower.

Other treasures appear as we walk. Prairie dock. Some rough-cut leaves
of compass plant. All of these tell us we're walking through prairie,
not an old field. Signs of a survivor. The rain starts up again. Wind
and wet blur the grasses into a watercolor of motion.

The rain also brings out the globe-dark silhouettes of rattlesnake
master and pops of black-eyed Susan seedheads. I imagine these two
plants in summer; their flashes of silvery white and lemon yellow.

Reality, in the form of more cold drizzle, brings me back to the
present. Kath will be the first to tell you this little prairie remnant
is here because of Dr. Robert Betz, who identified prairie bush clover
(*Lespedeza leptostachya*) here in the 1970s and championed the
prairie's survival. We don't find the prairie bush clover as we hike
today, but we do find round-headed bush clover. Not nearly so unusual,
but still intriguing.

Look around and discover a jewelry box full of plant gems. New Jersey
tea with its blown-out seedheads and curl of last leaves. Bee balm, with
its powdered leaves at the end of the season, exhaling an astringent
scent. Big bluestem, the Illinois state grass, waves its turkey-footed
seedhead against the gray sky.

The Hinsdale Prairie refuses to give up the ghost, despite inroads from
utility work, encroachment by development, and occasional mowing on the
east and west side that shaves off precious portions of the tallgrass.
Crown vetch, teasel, and daylilies threaten to dispossess the Indian
grass, little bluestem, and wild quinine.

Kath does everything she can to raise awareness of this remnant. She
founded "Friends of Hinsdale Prairie," dedicated to advocating for the
prairie on social media and with local government. She intercedes for
the prairie when she sees unusual activity, like utility trucks parking
on the grasses or neighbors throwing yard waste into the wildflowers.
She picks up trash. Each day brings a new challenge. And Kath is only
one person.

But she's one person changing the world, making a difference. Right
where she lives. Kath inspires me that change is possible---if only we
will step up. Take care of the places right in front of us. Tell others
why something matters.

How will you change your world? There's never been a better time to find
out.
