---
title: "My Integrated Life"
subtitle: "Part 1"
date: 2019-07-11T19:58:21-07:00
draft: false
author: "Dartanyan Brown"
articletype: "Essay"
headerimage: "my-integrated-life-pt-1.jpg"
headshot:
authorbio:
---

*Born in the Midwest at nearly the
exact middle of the 20th Century, Dartanyan Brown has been
front-and-center for many of American culture's most defining struggles,
particularly the Civil Rights movement and the advent of revolutions in
music and technology. Where many people content themselves with one
career, Brown has had at least four: in journalism, in musical
performance, in the tech sector and in education. Through it all, he has
continued to forge ahead with an optimism and openness to connection
that he learned in a family guided by a strong maternal grandmother who
grew up in an integrated Iowa town where she "didn't know nothin' 'bout
no segregation!"*

*This unique foundation, along with the exceptional outlook this gave
him, has enabled him to live what he refers to as "My Integrated Life."*

*In this issue of* Rootstalk*, we're running Part I of his remarkable
story. Part II will appear in the Spring 2019 issue.*

My name is Dartanyan Brown. I'm an African-American conceived in
California and born in 1949 in Des Moines, Iowa.

I'm also a former *Des Moines Register^1^* reporter, as well as a
third-generation musician with deep roots in American Jazz, Folk, Rock
'n Roll and Electronic music traditions. I've also been an educational
technology enthusiast, though I label myself an artist-educator, having
spent over 40 years creating interdisciplinary arts-centered curricula
for students in public- and college-preparatory environments.

That I identify as all these things and more is a testimony to the
family, community and educational influences that aligned through the
years on my behalf. Reflecting on over six decades of experience, I can
say that having been born in Iowa prepared me well for a fantastic
journey that I like to describe as My Integrated Life.

**Buxton Roots**

To begin, let's travel back in time 122 years ago to a coal seam in
Monroe County, Iowa, owned by the Consolidation Coal Co. of Chicago. The
town that grew up around the mine, Buxton^2^ (near present day Albia),
was named eponymously for its manager, Ben C. Buxton. That was where my
great-grandparents, Ross and Blanche Johnson, arrived from Virginia in
1895. Why did they travel so far?

To understand why my grandparents and other African Americans perceived
Iowa as a place of refuge, we have to understand the conditions they
endured in 1890's Virginia. In the year 1894, African Americans were
actually the majority of the population of Albemarle County, Virginia.
(The county was home to 606 free Blacks and 13,916 enslaved African
Americans, compared to 12,103 Whites.) Of course, fear of that Black
majority engendered the kinds of naked oppression you might expect from
those dedicated to maintaining White supremacy by any means necessary.
Segregation was the rule in every area of Charlottesville public life.

Ross Johnson, my great-grandfather was well aware of social, vocational
and economic lines that could or could not be crossed. Even a casual
review of what my ancestors endured in Jim Crow Virginia serves to
underline the hope and possibility that buoyed them on their journey out
of the South. During the Civil War, Iowa had been on the Union side of
things (thank goodness!) and so this land was blessed with a somewhat
more progressive, humanistic perspective than, say, Missouri or the
states that had been in the Confederacy. So, Ross and Blanch Porter
Johnson left Charlottesville in 1893 for coal mining work on the Iowa
prairie. My grandmother, Lettie Porter Thompson, was born in Monroe
County on November 19, 1896.

As a child in Iowa, Lettie experienced a totally different social matrix
than the one she would've endured in Charlottesville. That is not to say
her family members didn't experience reduced opportunities because of
their skin color, but life was materially better in Iowa if for no other
reason than that they were able to take advantage of social and
educational opportunities denied them in the South.

That my Grandmother could proudly say of her Iowa childhood: "we didn't
know nothin' 'bout no segregation!" meant that something very
significant had occurred. With a gleam in her eye that was still there
in her 80s, she told me, "The happiest time was getting out for recess
because you could play with ALL the children on the playground."

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-1.jpg" caption="Buxton, Iowa, as it was at the turn of the 19th and 20th Centuries. Public-domain image from [Blackpast.org](http://blackpast.org)." %}}

Over the years, my grandmother described Buxton as generally a very good
place to grow up. "I don't like this one, I don't like that one...can't
go here, can't go there...we never had that nonsense!" That was
Lettie...always keeping it real. Perhaps the most important thing was
that you could get along with people, and basic respect was accorded to
just about everyone---unless you couldn't handle your liquor.

Her biggest regret was leaving high school before graduation. Working to
help support the family was necessary, though, and so while her two
sisters, Katherine and Anzul, were able to finish high school (Katherine
was a state debate champion in the late 30s), Lettie, also a fine
musician, sacrificed her potential opportunities for the sake of others
in the family.

The grace with which Lettie Thompson lived her life was a model for
folks both Black and White. As I mentioned, she wouldn't allow talk
about racial disharmony, and she instilled high standards in her family
in terms of education, personal behavior and vocational excellence. .

Getting along with people of any ethnicity was the hallmark of my
grandmother's philosophy of life. She lived it and wouldn't tolerate any
derogatory talk about anyone. When I was a youngster, my parents would
go for drives, visiting friends both Black and White in little
communities outside of Des Moines. Mom and Dad would pack my two
brothers (Kevan and Don) and me into dad's beloved '55 Dodge and head
off to Albia, Marshalltown, Perry or somewhere else where the family had
friends from the Buxton days.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-2.jpg" caption="Dartanyan’s  grandmother, Lettie Porter Thompson" %}}

I remember hearing about The Buxton Club^3^, a social circle of mainly
women whose families had roots in Buxton/Monroe County. In the summer of
2018, I was happy to find out that the Buxton Club still sustains the
memory of the place. It's amazing that over a century later, the
memories of Buxton still have a powerful impact on those whose
predecessors directly experienced it. Without question, these are the
cornerstones of My Integrated Life.

My maternal family's experience in Buxton was key to establishing
sympathetic, forthright relationships with people regardless of ethnic
or racial difference. My parents' expansive worldview and pursuit of
knowledge across disciplines was pivotal in shaping my view of music,
education, technology and culture. It is the matrix from which springs
the experiences I write about here.

**My Parents Meet**

My father, Philadelphia-born Ellsworth T. Brown, met my mother, Mary
Alice Thompson, in Los Angeles after the Second World War. Mom was
studying music at Los Angeles City College and working as an extruder at
Lockheed Aircraft when dad returned stateside after his wartime duties
in the Merchant Marine. They got married in early 1949. A few months
before I was due to be born, Mom decided that she wanted to be near her
family. Ellsworth and Mary left L.A. and moved back to Iowa---just in
time for me to arrive in October of 1949 at Mercy Hospital.

We lived at 1434 Walker Street on Des Moines' east side. It was
integrated like Buxton was, and we had lots of Jewish, African-American,
Latino and European-American neighbors.

In the mid-50s the Walker Street house was a hub for rehearsals, jam
sessions, and music lessons for students like 16-year-old Frank
Perowsky^4^ who left Des Moines to forge an incredible career as an
arranger, instrumentalist, studio musician and recording artist in New
York City. Dad even had a system you could use to press your own
recordings^5^ from blank vinyl discs. (Don't ask me how that worked!!)

Ernest "Speck" Redd^6^---originally from Hannibal, Missouri---while
certainly not the only good piano player, was the most respected African
American jazz piano player of the 50s and 60s in Des Moines. Because he
lived three blocks down Walker Street from us, there were frequent music
sessions involving him and my father. Charlie Parker^7^ was the reigning
king of Jazz at that time, and I remember spirited discussions between
the musicians about how to interpret Bird's musical innovations. Speck
was posthumously inducted into the Des Moines Community Jazz Center
(CJC) Jazz Hall of Fame^8^ in 2005. My dad's induction came in 2010.

Dad was a bebopper (bebop^9^ being a kind of jazz introduced during the
1940s by innovators like Charlie Parker); Mom loved Rhumba, Merengue,
and European Classical music of all kinds. I was immersed in these
sounds, almost inundated with them, from the time I was born. I would
sing (Mom would call it yowling) along with records---no matter what
style.

Though my parents later divorced and for a time my father drifted out of
my life, this was a time when I gained my basic appreciation for ALL
music dedicated to telling stories and bringing healing to our
beleaguered souls.

**My early exposure to technology**

The Merriam-Webster dictionary defines the word integration as
"incorporating or coordinating separate elements as equals into a social
environment." It also has a significant, though different, meaning in
the world of mathematics.

My father was familiar with both the social and the mathematical
contexts for integration. Ellsworth had been one of the few Black radio
officers in the Merchant Marine during WWII. Dad integrated his aptitude
for mathematics into his love of music, and this led him to the
Schillinger System of Musical Composition^10^. Years later, at my
father's induction into the Iowa Jazz Hall of Fame, I learned from his
friends in attendance that he brought musicians to our Walker Street
house to teach them the Schillinger System.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-3.jpg" %}}

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-4.jpg" caption="Dartanyan’s  musical parents, Ellsworth and Mary Alice" %}}

Music, mathematics and technology were completely integrated in my
father's mind. In my 20s, when I encountered the writings of R.
Buckminster Fuller^11^, I found someone who could clearly articulate
complicated ideas in the same way my father could. Bucky's *Operating
Manual for Spaceship Earth*^12^ was an inspiration, and it remains an
inspiration to this day.

Dad also collected radios, and the pieces in his collection were objects
of fascination for me. I remember a small room in our house that was
filled with scopes and electronic parts. As a youngster watching
television (we baby boomers were the first TV generation) I was awed by
science fiction serials of the day (Captain Video^13^ anyone?). The
radios on Dad's worktable had these things called "tubes" inside, and to
me they looked like little spaceships. I delighted in removing them from
the back of old radios and zooming them around the room flying my
mission to Mars.

{{% pullquote %}}According to my grandmother and everyone else I knew, if there was something I wanted to do, I had to get out there, prepare myself and go for it. During the tumultuous years of the 1960s, I would find myself pursuing ambitions in two realms: the literary and the musical.{{% /pullquote %}}

**The 60s: Music, and _The Register_**

According to my grandmother and everyone else I knew, if there was
something I wanted to do, I had to get out there, prepare myself and go
for it. During the tumultuous years of the 1960s, I would find myself
pursuing ambitions in two realms: the literary and the musical.

As a child in 1954-56, I had watched Superman on television, but rather
than Superman, I wanted to be Clark Kent, the mild-mannered reporter. At
age 12, I decided I wanted to be a writer.

In a similar way, my childhood experience growing up in a hub of the
musical community primed me also for a passionate, lifelong obsession
with music. It seems fitting that a decade so filled with foment and
change for our country should also be transformational for me
personally. It is yet another example of integration as my life's theme.

In 1964, my best friend George T. Clinton (whom we called "G.T.") played
the Hammond B3 organ in a band called The Upsetters. It included drummer
Jimmy Brown, guitarist Bernie Fogel and bassist Wally Ackerson. I blame
these guys for destroying what was left of my resistance to making music
a participation sport. George lived in what was called the "Southeast
Bottoms" or Chesterfield district of Des Moines. Raised in the Shiloh
Baptist Church, G.T. was steeped in Gospel and Praise music, but he also
studied jazz extensively with our neighbor Speck Redd while he was still
in middle school. By 1964, he had added the "gospel" of Little Richard
to his repertoire, and became Des Moines' first Beatles-era "rock star".
His musical talent was matched by a dangerously sexy rock star attitude
that Jagger himself might have envied. An African-American with a Beatle
haircut (!) and an instinct for knowing where the music of our
generation was heading, George introduced me to memorable jazz and rock
music experiences long before I considered actually performing myself.

He introduced me to a local Jazz Festival at the First Unitarian Church
and took me to the KRNT Theater to see Illinois Speed Press^14^ and
Chicago Transit Authority (later Chicago^15^), as well as Veterans
Auditorium to hear Cream^16^ (god, Eric Clapton played LOUD!!). He
started taking me to his bands' rehearsals and asked the bassist to show
me how to play a blues bass line.

After a lot of practicing in the basement, I was playing bass myself,
and in the winter of 1968 I went with a group of friends to the Drake
Fieldhouse for a concert by a band from Chicago.

It was the Paul Butterfield Blues Band^17^ featuring the legendary
harmonica player and singer. He introduced 17-year-old Buzz Feiten on
guitar to us. Also on board were Phillip Wilson on drums, Tenor
saxophone player/vocalist and songwriter Brother Gene Dinwiddie, and I
think David Sanborn was in there, too, on alto saxophone.

I had never heard of this band before, but after the concert I went out
and bought their new album ("The Resurrection of Pigboy Crabshaw^18^")
and lost the rest of my mind while playing it.

Everything about this music confirmed that something big was missing
from my own life. My mother and father had divorced sometime in the 1961
through 1963 period. I'm not sure when, exactly, because between the
ages of 11-13, memories of my father seemed to just gradually fade away.
My brothers and I were used to him going to out of town engagements, but
as I got into middle school I realized that he was just...gone. I
must've eventually been told the who/what/why/when and how of the
situation but that didn't soften the emotional upset.

The songs, the lyrics, the sound...everything about the music I began
listening to after the Paul Butterfield concert seemed to beckon me back
home. There was something so inherently comforting and challenging at
the same time that something inside of me literally cracked open, I
suppose. What was revealed was a yawning cavern of stuffed pain,
questioning and longing to understand what, besides my dad, happened to
be missing from my life.

{{% figure caption="A portrait of the artist as a young journalist. Dartanyan at the offices of the Drake Times Delphic" src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-5.jpg" %}}

I struggled to deal with feelings that had nothing to do with striving,
with achieving, or with caring about social position. I discovered the
primal longing that each of us is subject to as human beings. It was the
simple realization that my family had fractured and I had tried to act
as if nothing was wrong in the years since the divorce. My brothers and
I were trained to keep moving forward and not to talk, think about, or
acknowledge the chaos that enveloped our lives in the years 1960-70.

After the Butterfield Concert, with friends Rick Arbuckle, Paul Micich,
Frank Tribble, and Sylvester Strother, I started the Black and Blues
Band as a kind of serious hobby. I was really glad I learned to play the
blues on bass and guitar, because I was ready to fit right in to the
Blues Revival that followed in the wake of the British Invasion^19^.

I feel it important here to mention that Blues music---that
quintessential African-American music form native to the USA---was being
ignored by almost everyone in 1960. By 1964, though, the Beatles, the
Rolling Stones, The Kinks, Fleetwood Mac and other British rock stars
revealed that the secret of their success was the Blues elements they
cribbed from Americans like B.B. King, Muddy Waters, Elmore James,
Little Richard, Sonny Boy Williamson, Gatemouth Brown and, of course,
Mr. Crossroads himself, Robert Johnson. It was deeply ironic: White kids
all over America were losing their minds over British musicians who
credited, praised and emulated the Black originators of the music. I
believe the homage musicians like Mick Jagger, Paul McCartney and others
paid to their Black mentors added momentum to an American Civil Rights
movement that sought to restore humanity and dignity (and commercial
success) to many of those same individuals.

The summer before my senior year, I scored my first job, sweeping up the
floors at Kassar Drug Store on Locust Avenue. It was, as advertised, a
pretty menial gig, and while I was sweeping there was lots of time to
think about what I really wanted to do with my life. I was already
taking journalism classes at North High School with Mr. Barnett, and I
was already Sports Editor for the *North High Oracle*. Importantly, I
had also written some articles for the *Iowa Bystander*^20^, the state's
most established newspaper for the African American community.
*Bystander* editor Allen Ashby was my first mentor. He was a wise,
knowledgeable man who prepared me well to go forward. So during the late
summer 1967, as I was slinging the broom at Kassar's, I thought that my
experience might enable me to at least try to get a job at the *Des
Moines Register.* I just remember thinking: "This is it. Go and at least
ask about a job."

I put the broom aside, checked out, and walked the four blocks to the
*Register & Tribune* building. Once inside, I asked the receptionist
where to apply for a job and she told me Fourth floor (while looking at
me like she was thinking: "Sure kid, go on up...fat chance though...")

Thanking her, I turned and walked through the lobby toward the
elevators, noticing the huge, slowly rotating globe that displayed the
time in every country. I also looked up to see the big, mounted panels
displaying Pulitzer Prize winning stories, editorial cartoons and
headlines. At that point in history, the *Register and Tribune*
newspapers WERE the news sources all Iowa (and most of the Midwest)
depended upon.

{{% pullquote %}}Integration is a part of this time in my life: when I was hired as a coffee boy, sports phone desk person and copy runner, I was the only African American on the *Register* editorial staff.{{% /pullquote %}}

I got off the elevator, turned left twice and walked into a beehive
convention in which activity was going off in all directions at once. I
had happened to arrive just at Saturday afternoon's sports deadline,
where---it seemed---every living being who wasn't playing football
somewhere in Iowa was covering someone playing football somewhere in
Iowa.

Sports Editor Leighton Housh was patrolling the writers' desks where
Bill Bryson Sr.^21^, Buck Turnbull, Jim Moackler, and Ron Maly were
racing toward their personal deadlines, pounding out stories on
typewriters that emitted the 'chik' 'chik-chik' 'chik'- sound of those
old metal key-action Smith-Coronas.

Meanwhile, Bill Dwyre^22^, Ron's Maly's brother Phil, Larry "Laddy" Paul
and Copy Chief Howard Kluender were at the editor's ring, heads down,
pencils slashing through sloppy copy, replacing it with elegant, brief
sentences, designed to be read over coffee in the morning edition.

When a break came in the action, Housh came over and took my application
and asked me why I wanted to do this job, and what made me think I
could.

I surprised myself with an almost immediate answer: I already was
writing for my school newspaper, I really, really wanted to be a
reporter, and I'd do anything to begin working there.

He took his pipe and switched it from one side of his mouth to the
other, evidently curious. "Come back tomorrow," he said, "And we'll
start you on the phones."

Stunned, I stood there as it sunk in, thinking: *Wait...he said...come
back tomorrow...that means... I got the job!!*

That moment validated everything I had ever been told by my family about
the way opportunity would be open to you if you were prepared. The civil
rights era was right on top of us then, and this gave me a certain
amount of courage, I suppose, to go after what I really wanted. As I see
it, moments like this one---where courage is what's required, if we are
going to step up and seize the opportunity when we have the
chance---come to all of us sooner or later. Ethnicity has very little to
do with it. Mine was a quiet triumph. In seeking an objective that I
felt prepared to handle, I was confirming both parental guidance and
personal observation of the way things could be.

Integration is a part of this time in my life: when I was hired as a
coffee boy, sports phone desk person and copy runner, I was the only
African American on the *Register* editorial staff.

Soon after I was hired, though, other African Americans followed:
photographers Ron Bayles and (fellow North High graduate and NHS Hall of
Fame Inductee) David Lewis came onboard, as well as the (great) feature
writer (and another North High graduate) Elenora E. Tate. Each brought
extremely high levels of professionalism to the job.

Another important milestone that I should note: after serving for a few
months as coffee boy and copy runner, I was reporting on high school
sports events and learning the ropes of general assignment reporting. On
April 4th 1968, I was on the spot for the reporting break of a
lifetime---which sadly, was connected to the death of a great American
hero. Martin Luther King's assassination was an earthshaking event, and
in the wake of his murder Black communities across the nation erupted in
rioting and what amounted to a communal scream of pain, anger and
sorrow.

Des Moines' Black community also ignited in violence that consumed the
central corridor along University Avenue. I was in the sports department
when I was approached by the city editor with a question: Would I be
able to grab a camera and go to the area of the rioting to take pictures
and report on what might be happening?

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-6.jpg" caption="Protest against the Vietnam war in 1968, at Drake University" %}}

Before I knew it, I was stepping over fire hoses in the street, avoiding
the police who were trying to keep order, and estimating the size of the
groups of people who were either part of the action or observers.
Martin's death was a tragedy that I felt viscerally, but I was being
given a chance to contribute to the reporting of a major news story. In
later years, I learned that event was a sad but important launching pad
for more than a few other Black journalists of that era, including the
late Ed Bradley. After that night, I was moved to general assignment
reporting covering stories including the Iowa legislature.

Thankfully, my faith in my ability to attain a job that I wanted was
greater than my fear of being rejected. Racist messages, seeking to sow
fear and doubt about people of color, were as strong then as they are
now. Knowing about my family's experiences in Iowa over the last
100-plus years, though, helped provide me with the perspective I would
need to navigate a new world for which there were few road maps.

Looking back on it, I think the best thing about my time at the *Des
Moines Register* was acquiring great research skills. The esteemed Iowa
author Bill Bryson^23^ and I both began working for the *Des Moines
Register* while still in high school. His father, Bill Bryson Sr. was
one of the nation's great sports writers. Bill Jr. and I were high
school-age copy runners and cub reporters learning the ropes, but we
began a friendship that continues to this day. Those who love Bill's
body of work appreciate granular research combined with the wit of a
happy sage. Bill began developing those gorgeous research skills whilst
searching out obscure bits of information in the *Registers'* vast
archive of clip files in 1967-68.

The investigative reporter is the original Google. They never rest, and
they never stop turning over rocks to find the truth. Learning where to
look, whom to ask, and whom to "socially engineer" have always been the
hallmarks of those who went out and got the story, and got it right.
Pulitzer-Prize-winning writers like Nathan 'Nick' Kotz^24^ and the
*Register's* own Clark Mollenhoff^25^ were the kind of reporters that we
need vastly more of today.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-7.jpg" caption="Anti-racism protest at Drake University in 1968" %}}

Then, in 1968, my journalistic worlds became a little too well
integrated. Let me explain:

During my sophomore year at Drake, I was the sports editor of the
University's student paper, the *Times-Delphic*^26^, while at the same
time I was now a Police Beat reporter for the *Register*. As an
18-year-old, I was doing pretty well. I was getting lots of
opportunities, and like a hungry kid at a banquet I was grabbing
everything I could.

Late in the 1968-69 Drake Basketball season the Bulldogs were playing a
pivotal Missouri Valley Conference game at Veterans Memorial Auditorium.
Meanwhile, I was on police beat at the police station across the Des
Moines River to the south and east of the auditorium.

I was monitoring the police radio, which was my job, waiting for
something to happen. Meanwhile, the little AM radio on the shelf was
tuned to the basketball game and crackling with excitement. WHO radio
broadcaster Jim Zabel was going crazy as the Bulldogs were in a very
close contest.

*Man, how did this happen?* I thought. *I'm the Sports Editor; how come
I'm up here at the cop shop, dammit?!*

Well, as 18-year-olds will do, I decided to take a chance. I could leave
the station, hightail it up to the auditorium, grab some of the action
and take a few pictures for the next edition of the *T-D*. What could go
wrong?

Well...upon my return to the copy desk after my shift at the station, I
was asked how the game went? My attempt at playing dumb was unmasked by
the fact that the game was broadcast on TV (duh?) and my face had
clearly been visible among those on the sidelines. The press passes
giveth and the press passes taketh away. Luckily there had been no
murders, fires, robberies or even kittens up a tree during my absence,
but my two-places-at-once act became office legend at the pre-Gannett
*Register*.

{{% pullquote %}}The tragedy of the Kent State Massacre in May of 1970 triggered deep evaluation for me: Who was I, really? What was I doing here? Where else should I be? Why couldn’t I ever relax and how could I regain equilibrium?{{% /pullquote  %}}

**The Wobble Begins**

There was no doubt that my balancing act was getting to be a serious
handful. Music, academics, a budding journalism career, the ever-present
civil rights struggle and war worries were weighing on my mind.

It was also getting increasingly difficult for me to ignore internal
questions about my absent father. Like that annoying small stone in your
shoe, it wasn't long before---one way or another---I was going to have
to stop along the path to deal with it.

The tragedy of the Kent State Massacre^27^ in May of 1970 triggered deep
evaluation for me: Who was I, really? What was I doing here? Where else
should I be? Why couldn't I ever relax, and how could I regain
equilibrium?

Like reviewing old movie footage, I began to replay my life looking for
something to help me deal with something deep that I hadn't dealt with
previously. The more I concentrated, the more I began to remember events
surrounding my parents' breakup that I hadn't allowed myself to revisit
ever before.

At the time when a young man most needs the closest guidance to navigate
the path into manhood, I was without my captain. Adding to the chaos, we
were forced to move out of our house because of something called Urban
Renewal^28^. I learned that urban renewal was actually short hand for
"build a big new freeway---over land formerly known as the Black
neighborhood."

Our little home, located at 1434 Walker St., was to be leveled to make
way for the new freeway.

So: wow, first Dad is gone and now the city is telling us they can just
take our house and offer compensation based on their assessment, not our
asking price. Mom was able eventually to find us a new home in the Union
Park neighborhood. Surprisingly, the move turned out to be a very cool
thing, because instead of being held at a middle school, my new 9th
grade classes convened at North High School, so I got to attend high
school a year early. This wouldn't be the last time a perceived negative
would transform itself to my advantage. Flashing back to the present, I
realize that attending classes at Drake was becoming burdensome because
I simply had too many commitments and no time for rest or reflection.

As for Viet Nam---another stressor at the time---Mom hadn't even wanted
me to join the Cub Scouts so, the military was completely out of the
question. As she told me with fire in her eye: "I'll send you to Canada
myself before I'd let them have you for that war!"

In an atmosphere of so much turmoil, I was really missing my father's
influence in my life. Telling myself that I didn't care, or that it
didn't matter wasn't working for me anymore. In the spring of 1969, I
was sitting in my office at Drake when I had a revelation-like flash:
I'm a reporter. I can find out everything else; why don't I find my
father? Wow! good question Dartanyan. What would a good reporter do?

I decided a good reporter would try the musicians' union. I got the
number for the New York Musicians Union Local 212, placed the call and
asked: "Hello? Can you give me contact information for Ellsworth Brown
please?"

"Just a minute...yeah we've got a number right here for you."

Holy crap. I had my Dad's phone number. Now the question was: "Do I
reeeallly want to make the call?"

No longer able to quell the inner chaos that draped over me like a heavy
overcoat, I dialed the number in hopes that some resolution might be
gained from closing this long unresolved circle. Hearing his "hello" on
the other end of the line, I felt like a salmon arriving back upstream
to its spawning grounds. My father's voice resolved the suspended chords
of my life. I think we were both relieved that we were still alive and
that positive energy seemed to attend our reunion. We filled each other
in on some key points. Yes, Ellsworth was still a working musician,
living on Staten Island. No, Dartanyan didn't play a lot because he was
in college, and working as a journalist.

That call was the coolest thing ever, and after it I updated my brothers
Don and Kevan on the news. Reconnecting with dad was literally life
changing, as all three of us would try, with varying degrees of success,
to rebuild a relationship with Ellsworth and to make up for the time
lost.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-8.jpg" caption="Wheatstraw on stage in Greenwood Park in Des Moines: Ron Dewitte (guitar), Dartanyan (bass) and David Bernstein (on drums). Photo by Bill Plymat" %}}

After the call, I resolved to go to NYC to see dad during my Spring
break.

Our reunion was pretty crazy. We obviously had love for each other, but
it was also obvious that, generationally speaking, we had developed very
different views of the world. Example: I played electric bass and Dad
thought all electric instruments were illegitimate. It was a great first
meeting, though, and when it was time for me to return to Des Moines, I
found out that, in addition to his music, Dad had high respect for
German engineering. He was an excellent Volkswagen and Mercedes
repairman, and gifted me with a Volkswagen bus from his small collection
of vehicles.

Upon my return to Des Moines, I knew that my life trajectory was
changing. Youthful frustration with the hypocrisy of the Viet Nam war
was palpable. We intuitively knew that the government's intentions were
not what they were said to be. Our generation had to be both courageous
and outrageous enough to look beyond the stories we were being told and
to find out for ourselves how to enact our morals.

Trying to keep all of this balanced in my 19-year-old brain was causing
burn out. My grades were going down, and staying up until 2 a.m. jamming
with my musician friends wasn't really helping me in classes. Something
was going to give; I just wasn't prepared for how it would happen.

I was spending more time playing with musicians in town and discovering
where jazz, blues, rock, and even country players were jamming and
experimenting. There were always adoring fans at these happenings.

Des Moines might have been Hicksville in some ways, but marijuana still
found its way there just like everywhere else in the 60s. In fact, it
was hard NOT to run into the plant during those days. I mentioned my
tee-totaling folks earlier in this story and, of course, they had the
same attitude about pot. While I wasn't partaking (yet) it was always
being offered\...and I usually declined.

Well... and....

One time a gal offered me a half-smoked joint and I didn't want to be
impolite, so I took her half-smoked gift and stuck it in my billfold
saying, "If it's ok with you, I'll save it for later." Famous last
words.

{{% pullquote %}}Funny what joining a $90-a-week Blues band and leaving town will do for your crushed ego. I learned to care again. I started to care about myself and slowly dare to rebuild a value system.{{% /pullquote %}}

**Busted**

Later that evening, I was driving my newly acquired VW bus near campus
when, all of a sudden, the jarring lights of a police car in my rearview
mirror brought me to attention. In the best of times, Black guys don't
want to see flashing police lights in your review mirror. Upon request,
I offered up my ID and waited for everything to be ok. I hadn't gotten
my permanent license plates for the bus yet...but I had the paper
temporary permit, which was taped, to the rear window.

Well, he looked at my driver's license, looked at me, looked at my
license again...and then told me that I was under arrest!!?! He kind of
grinned as he held up my driver's license so I could
see....something..stuck..on..my..license?!

Jeez, I mean, how often do you hand a policeman your driver's
license...with a marijuana roach stuck to it? While he held it out in
front of me, I took a last desperate opportunity to 'save myself.' I
grabbed the roach and stuck it in my mouth and swallowed it. He didn't
seem to know whether to laugh or hit me, but in that moment, my life
passed before me and I knew it wasn't going to be ok for a while.

Twenty years of building, working, preparing, praying and striving were
(as I thought at the time) about to be completely wiped away. A roach no
bigger than my fingernail blew up my life as completely as if I had set
off a bomb. Which, in fact I had. Taken to jail, I had to call my mother
to bail me out, and you can believe I'll never forget the look on her
face.

Of course, I went from covering the news to *being* the news in the
worst way possible. The sense of shame was searing. The hopes and
aspirations of many in my family and community were upended with my
arrest for what amounted to the politically motivated machinations of
Richard Nixon. Fifty years later, when in many cases we refer to
marijuana as medicine, it seems a tragedy that he had the power to alter
so many lives for a craven political motive.

To say I was forever scarred by the experience was understatement. The
real, deeper lessons of the experience took some time for me to tease
out of the chaos. At this lowest point in my life thus far, I was ready
to chuck it all. As I was sinking, though, I was thrown a lifeline. It
was called Wheatstraw....

In April 1970, musicians Ron Dewitte, Craig Horner and David Bernstein
asked me to join their band, and since the band's former bass player
(whom I replaced) owned its former name, "The American Legend," we'd
have to find a new name. We were blues addicts at this time, and there
was an obscure guy named Petey Wheatstraw. We thought that name (also on
cigarette papers of that time) was funny, so we went with it for a band
name.

Funny what joining a \$90-a-week Blues band and leaving town will do for
your crushed ego. I learned to care again. I started to care about
myself and slowly dare to rebuild a value system. My searing sense of
failure began to ease as I devoted many hours to practice, listening,
analyzing and performing with my new band mates.

It was also a good thing that I was now actually communicating with my
father. With his help, I eventually came to see that leaving college was
a personal reset that put my life on a more sentient path. It sure beat
going to Viet Nam to kill (or be killed) by folks I didn't even know.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-9.jpg" caption="A symphony in brown crushed velvet: Dartanyan in Six the Hard Way after it morphed from Wheatstraw" %}}

**Last Resort?**

I might not have considered leaving everything behind to join a blues
band if it hadn't been for guitarist Ron Dewitte, who was eventually
inducted into the Iowa Blues Hall of Fame with me in 2010. He was one of
the most expressive blues guitar players I had ever heard. The touch,
timing and fire that distinguished his playing rivaled anything I'd ever
heard from anyone short of Jimi Hendrix. Craig Horner, our keyboardist
and trumpet player, was also a fine musician who spent long hours
practicing and listening to everyone from John Coltrane^29^ to Jimi
Hendrix. Importantly, I discovered that culture isn't just about famous
individuals. It's what my friend, University of Indiana music professor
David Baker, described as the Inner Circles vs. the Outer Circles. The
marketplace needs "stars" (outer circles) for sure, but the real
"capillaries of culture" (inner circles) are those local masters of
community knowledge and custom who often remain unknown beyond their
locality. So, while you may not have heard of Ron Dewitte, Craig Horner
or David Bernstein, there was no doubt these guys dedicated their lives
to expressing musical truth. Wheatstraw spent a fair amount of time on
the road during 1970-72, playing the Midwestern states of Iowa,
Wisconsin, Illinois and Minnesota.

It was in Wisconsin that a new chapter was getting ready to begin for
me, but I sure didn't recognize it at the time.

The first time I heard Bill Chase^30^ was when Wheatstraw was booked at
Judy's Gin Mill (!), a beer bar in Fond du Lac Wisconsin. It was a
Friday afternoon and David, Ronnie and I were sitting around our hotel
room doing basically nothing. Things were calm until Craig literally
burst through the door (knocking over a nightstand in the process) and
leaped to the record player. He took the record that was playing on the
turntable and frisbee'd it across the room. Replacing it with one he
held, he said: "You guys are NOT going to believe this\...!"

And with that, we heard the first track of Chase's first album entitled
"Open Up Wide\...."

Once I peeled my brain off the ceiling, I researched Bill Chase and
discovered he'd been a star trumpet soloist for big bands of the 60s,
including Maynard Ferguson^31^, Woody Herman^32^ and Stan Kenton^33^.
Bill was a monster trumpet player and now he was a band leader whose
first single ("Get It On") would become an international hit song.

Hearing the album definitely changed my impressions of what music could
be; but at the time, I had no idea that Chase's music would literally
reshape my life about 24 months from that moment. Wheatstraw toured for
two more years, surviving until 1972, when in desperation we became Six
the Hard Way (don't ask\...). Reality finally caught up to us, though,
and I went back to Des Moines to write music and finish a journalism
degree. Or so I thought...

When I returned to Des Moines after the Wheatstraw experience, I formed
my first working group, called Dynamite. It was an extremely funky
quartet featuring members Phil Aaberg on piano, Rod Chaffee on guitar,
Tom Gordon on drums, and yours truly on bass guitar. A band of writers,
we played bluesy-jazzy roots music that morphed from one style to
another with great relish. Our influences were as wide ranging as John
Coltrane, Paul Butterfield, John Cage^34^, the group Tree (an Iowa City
Free Jazz collective), Donny Hathaway^35^ and the Sons of Champlin^36^.

Dynamite was a fun band with talent to burn, but unfortunately for us
(though fortunately for my future), through a connection to the Kansas
band The Fabulous Flippers^37^, our drummer, Tommy Gordon was called up
to the "big time" to play with...Bill Chase!! (Chase's second album,
"Ennea," had been released a few months earlier). Tommy was a great
drummer who rightly jumped at the chance to play with Bill. Of course,
that meant the end of our great little Des Moines band but things were
far from boring...

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-10.jpg" caption="Chase’s second album “Ennea” came out not long before Bill Chase called Dartanyan up to the big-time" %}}

After Tommy left town, I collaborated with John Rowat, Bill Jacobs and
Michael Schomers to start a band called The Mothership. It was another
more experimental band with jazz/rock/country influences. We had a band
house on the SE corner of Des Moines on Army Post Road. Next door to our
house there was a big roadhouse called the 505 Club (which everyone
called "The Five." It was notorious as what I would call a "cowboy punch
out" bar. It was a rough joint, but the music that got played in there
was worth the risk of injury or dismemberment.

The Five was owned and managed by Dick Kampus, a large and hearty man
with a real lust for throwing a party, The Five was the classic
edge-of-town bar which even the local police didn't mess with too much
because it was that rough.

Over the years, we saw lots of different groups there. Funky horn groups
like the previously mentioned Flippers, singer Marvin Spencer^38^, and
lots of groups from Kansas, Florida, Louisiana and elsewhere. The list
of bands that toured the roadhouse circuit to carve out a career is
long. I was at home next door to the club when one day the phone
rang...

I picked it up. " Hello," I said.

"Hey Dart," said the excited voice on the other end, "Get your ass over
here now and hear this\...!" I recognized the voice as Dick's from
across the driveway at the Five.

"What are you talking about, man?" I queried.

"Just get over here NOW, you won't believe it."

As I loped across the expanse of white gravel, I heard the rhythmic thud
of bass guitar and drums coming through the walls of the club. As I got
closer to the door, the syncopation was getting "too good" if you know
what I mean. By the time I entered the cavernous club, it only took
another two or three minutes to realize that something special was
happening on the stage---and this was just rehearsal.

The group rehearsing for the evening's show was Wayne Cochran and his
band, the CC Riders^39^. For those of you unfamiliar with the tradition,
Wayne Cochran was a White soul singer in the tradition of James Brown.
The cool thing about Cochran was that he, like Brown, was the real deal.
He was a loud, signifyin', funkified White boy who could drive an
audience as well as any R&B veteran I ever saw. But I digress...

{{% pullquote %}}I listened transfixed as I watched Jaco creating totally loose, but on-the-mark bass grooves. His sensibilities for groove and support and melodic bass playing were strangely scary, but at the same time an affirmation of where I knew the instrument could go.{{% /pullquote %}}

Cochran's energy emanated as much from his band as from his own nasty
soul. The band's engine was being stoked by a tall skinny kid on bass
who they called Jaco.

"Jaco" was Jaco Pastorius^40^, later bass player for Weather Report^41^,
which---alongside Miles Davis's^42^ electric bands, the Mahavishnu
Orchestra^43^, Return to Forever^44^, and Headhunters^45^---was one of
the most important jazz fusion bands of the 70s and 80s. When I saw him
at the Five, though, Jaco was the heart of Wayne Cochran and the CC
Riders' rhythm section, which also included guitarist Charlie Brent. (As
a side note, Brent---a dynamite arranger---would later contribute charts
to Bill Chase's second album, "Ennea.")

Well, I listened transfixed as I watched Jaco creating totally loose,
but on-the-mark bass grooves. His sensibilities for groove and support
and melodic bass playing were strangely scary, but at the same time an
affirmation of where I knew the instrument could go.

After the rehearsal, I made a beeline for the stage and introduced
myself to Jaco. Being an old newspaper reporter, I wasn't going to miss
an opportunity to "interview" this guy to find out where he got his
bouncy, funky style.

I offered our house next door if he wanted to hang out with us, and for
the next 3 days I played host to the Future Of Jazz Electric Bass! We
jammed, talked, went to the Cochran gig, then jammed some more, talked a
lot more about life, our families, Miles, and why each of us had a lot
to offer. I have never met a more honest, caring, sensitive and talented
individual than Jaco Pastorius in 1972.

While Jaco was a natural musician whose father played drums, he'd also
studied with Ira Sullivan^46^ at the University of Miami^47^. His mom
Greta was someone he was totally devoted to. Jaco already had a young
family then, and it was his single-minded goal to support his family by
convincing everyone that he was the world's greatest bass player!

He was convinced of that fact (I certainly wasn't going to disagree,
based on what I had heard) and he told me of his plans to leave the
Cochran band soon and travel to Boston to join up with a new friend
named Pat Metheny^48^. Metheny, he said, offered him an opportunity to
teach at Berklee College of Music^49^ in Boston. In 1976, Metheny---who
was then only 21---would make his seminal debut recording "Bright Size
Life"^50^ on ECM with Jaco. Later in 1974, Pastorius and Metheny joined
pianist Paul Bley and drummer Bruce Ditmas to record an album on Bley's
Improvising Artists^51^ label).

Anyway, the three days spent with Jaco could only be termed as a meeting
of kindred spirits. The next time I saw him was 1976 at the Newport Jazz
Festival^52^. By then he was with Weather Report and a true star. The
best thing was, when I saw him again, he actually spotted me at the back
of a large auditorium (Alice Tully Hall, I think) as I was walking in
for Weather Report's sound check.

From the stage, he saw me (barely visible I was) and yelled at the top
of his lungs "Hey DARTANYAN, HOW YA DOIN'." It was a testament to his
eyesight, his memory and his heart that he actually remembered our time
together after HIS life had changed so radically.

One sad note: The Jaco I knew in 1972 was on a natural high of life. He
neither smoked, nor drank, nor even talked about anything but the most
inspiring subjects. His goal was to play with Miles Davis. Period. He
knew he was good enough, musical enough, and hip enough and that was
that!

I never saw Jaco again after Newport. Back in 1972, he had told me that
he had a chemical imbalance that meant his sensitive system could not
tolerate most drugs or any alcohol. Moving to NYC was probably the worst
thing he could have done because the influences on him at that time were
uniformly bad. Every time news came in about him it was usually great
professional triumph but leavened with the sad news of his descent into
drug and alcohol abuse. Still, I'll always have memories (and the tapes)
of the Jaco Pastorius I knew, who propelled Wayne Cochran and the CC
riders in '72. Bless you Jaco.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-11.jpg" caption="Dartanyan sailing on stage when he was a member of Chase" %}}

**Back to Bill...**

It was now spring '73 and, as I mentioned earlier, Tommy Gordon, our
drummer in Dynamite, had already joined Chase through his Fabulous
Flippers connection. Former members of that group were touring with Bill
touring in support of the "Ennea" album, so Tommy's connection from
years earlier had paid off. It was about to do the same for me.

I was in my kitchen making a sandwich when the phone rang.

I picked it up with my mouth half-full and almost choked when the voice
on the other end said. "Hello, this is Bill Chase."

Needless to say, I was nervous and incredulous as he laid out his offer.

"I've been looking for a new bass player and Tommy says that you're a
great bass player and a singer too." I didn't quite know what to say
except to try to agree without sounding too egotistical (unlike my
friend Jaco, who would have had no problem promoting himself).

"We have a tour due to start in El Paso, Texas in two weeks," Bill said.
"Do you think you can make the gig?"

He asked me if I knew the music and I said that I knew the first album
from listening, but that was it. He said, "No matter, we've got all the
charts."

I just said a little prayer of thanks that I was playing in the Drake
University Jazz band with Bob Weast^53^. Taking two semesters of Jazz
Band had given me exactly the foundation I needed to read the charts I
lived with for the next 17 months.

Talk about bittersweet...

I had just signed a lease with my friends in Des Moines to secure our
band house and now was I going to leave town?

My band mates, John Rowat, Michael Schomers, Frank Tribble and Bill
Jacobs, were more supportive of me moving up than they were disappointed
at losing a renter, so I was off to Chicago to begin what would be
life-changing circumstances.

{{% figure src="/images/volume-v-issue-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1/my-integrated-life-pt-1-12.jpg" caption="Dartanyan onstage with Bill Chase" %}}